The purpose of the second edition remains the same as the ﬁrst edition: that is, to serve as an 
introduction to and overview of the ﬁeld of biomedical engineering. Many chapters have undergone major 
revision from the previous edition with new endof-chapter problems added. Some chapters were combined and 
some chapters were eliminated completely, with several new chapters added to reﬂect changes in the ﬁeld.

Over the past ﬁfty years, as the discipline of biomedical engineering has evolved, it has become clear that 
it is a diverse, seemingly all-encompassing ﬁeld that includes such areas as bioelectric phenomena, 
bioinformatics, biomaterials, biomechanics, bioinstrumentation, biosensors, biosignal processing, 
biotechnology, computational biology and complexity, genomics, medical imaging, optics and lasers, radiation 
imaging, rehabilitation engineering, tissue engineering, and moral and ethical issues. Although it is not 
possible to cover all of the biomedical engineering domains in this textbook, we have made an effort to 
focus on most of the major ﬁelds of activity in which biomedical engineers are engaged.

The text is written primarily for engineering students who have completed differential equations and a basic 
course in statics. Students in their sophomore year or junior year should be adequately prepared for this 
textbook. Students in the biological sciences, including those in the ﬁelds of medicine and nursing, can 
also read and understand this material if they have the appropriate mathematical background.

Although we do attempt to be fairly rigorous with our discussions and proofs, our ultimate aim is to help 
students grasp the nature of biomedical engineering. Therefore, we have compromised when necessary and have 
occasionally used less rigorous mathematics in order to be more understandable. A liberal use of 
illustrative examples ampliﬁes concepts and develops problem-solving skills. Throughout the text, MATLAB 1 
(a matrix equation solver) and SIMULINK 1 (an extension to MATLAB 1

for simulating dynamic systems) are used as computer tools to assist with problem solving. The Appendix 
provides the necessary background to use MATLAB 1 and SIMULINK 1 . MATLAB 1 and SIMULINK 1 are available 
from:

The Mathworks, Inc.

24 Prime Park Way Natick, Massachusetts 01760 Phone: (508) 647-7000 Email: info@mathworks.com WWW: 
http://www.mathworks.com {extend}

Chapters are written to provide some historical perspective of the major developments in a speciﬁc 
biomedical engineering domain as well as the fundamental principles that underlie biomedical engineering 
design, analysis, and modeling procedures in that domain. In addition, examples of some of the problems 
encountered, as well as the techniques used to solve them, are provided. Selected problems, ranging from 
simple to difﬁcult, are presented at the end of each chapter in the same general order as covered in the 
text.

The material in this textbook has been designed for a one-semester, two-semester, or three-quarter sequence 
depending on the needs and interests of the instructor. Chapter 1 provides necessary background to 
understand the history and appreciate the ﬁeld of biomedical engineering. Chapter 2 presents the vitally 
important chapter on biomedically-based morals and ethics. Basic anatomy and physiology are provided in 
Chapter 3. Chapters 4-10 provide the basic core biomedical engineering areas: biomechanics, rehabilitation 
engineering, biomaterials, tissue engineering, bioinstrumentation, biosensors, and biosignal processing. To 
assist instructors in planning the sequence of material they may wish to emphasize, it is suggested that the 
chapters on bioinstrumentation, biosensors, and biosignal processing should be covered together as they are 
interdependent on each other. The remainder of the textbook presents material on biomedical technology 
(Chapters 12-17).

A website is available at http://intro-bme-book.bme.uconn.edu/ that provides an errata and extra material.

1

BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING: A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

Joseph Bronzino PhD, PE

Chapter Contents

1.1 Evolution of the Modern Health Care System

1.2 The Modern Health Care System

1.3 What Is Biomedical Engineering?

1.4 Roles Played by Biomedical Engineers

1.5 Professional Status of Biomedical Engineering

1.6 Professional Societies

1.6.1 American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering (AIMBE)

1.6.2 IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS)

1.6.3 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) Exercises References and Suggested Reading

At the conclusion of this chapter, students will be able to:

&

&

&

Identify the major role that advances in medical technology have played in the establishment of the modern 
health care system.

Deﬁne what is meant by the term biomedical engineering and the roles biomedical engineers play in the 
health care delivery system.

Explain why biomedical engineers are professionals.

In the industrialized nations, technological innovation has progressed at such an accelerated pace that it 
is has permeated almost every facet of our lives. This is especially true in the area of medicine and the 
delivery of health care services. Although the art of medicine has a long history, the evolution of a 
technologically based health care system capable of providing a wide range of effective diagnostic and 
therapeutic treatments is a relatively new phenomenon. Of particular importance in this evolutionary process 
has been the establishment of the modern hospital as the center of a technologically sophisticated health 
care system.

Since technology has had such a dramatic impact on medical care, engineering professionals have become 
intimately involved in many medical ventures. As a result, the discipline of biomedical engineering has 
emerged as an integrating medium for two dynamic professions, medicine and engineering, and has assisted in 
the struggle against illness and disease by providing tools (such as biosensors, biomaterials, image 
processing, and artiﬁcial intelligence) that can be utilized for research, diagnosis, and treatment by 
health care professionals.

Thus, biomedical engineers serve as relatively new members of the health care delivery team that seeks new 
solutions for the difﬁcult problems confronting modern society. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a 
broad overview of technology’s role in shaping our modern health care system, highlight the basic roles 
biomedical engineers play, and present a view of the professional status of this dynamic ﬁeld.

1.1 EVOLUTION OF THE MODERN HEALTH CARE SYSTEM

Primitive humans considered diseases to be ‘‘visitations,’’ the whimsical acts of affronted gods or spirits. 
As a result, medical practice was the domain of the witch doctor and the medicine man and medicine woman. 
Yet even as magic became an integral part of the healing process, the cult and the art of these early 
practitioners were never entirely limited to the supernatural. These individuals, by using their natural 
instincts and learning from experience, developed a primitive science based on empirical laws. For example, 
through acquisition and coding of certain reliable practices, the arts of herb doctoring, bone setting, 
surgery, and midwifery were advanced. Just as primitive humans learned from observation that certain plants 
and grains were good to eat and could be cultivated, so the healers and shamans observed the nature of 
certain illnesses and then passed on their experiences to other generations.

Evidence indicates that the primitive healer took an active, rather than a simply intuitive interest in the 
curative arts, acting as a surgeon and a user of tools. For instance, skulls with holes made in them by 
trephiners have been collected in various parts of Europe, Asia, and South America. These holes were cut out 
of the bone with ﬂint instruments to gain access to the brain. Although one can only speculate the purpose 
of these early surgical operations, magic and religious beliefs seem to be the most likely reasons. Perhaps 
this procedure liberated from the skull the malicious demons that were thought to be the cause of extreme 
pain (as in the case of migraine) or attacks of falling to the ground (as in epilepsy). That this procedure 
was carried out

on living patients, some of whom actually survived, is evident from the rounded edges on the bone 
surrounding the hole which indicate that the bone had grown again after the operation. These survivors also 
achieved a special status of sanctity so that, after their death, pieces of their skull were used as amulets 
to ward off convulsive attacks. From these beginnings, the practice of medicine has become integral to all 
human societies and cultures.

It is interesting to note the fate of some of the most successful of these early practitioners. The 
Egyptians, for example, have held Imhotep, the architect of the ﬁrst pyramid (3000 BC ), in great esteem 
through the centuries, not as a pyramid builder, but as a doctor. Imhotep’s name signiﬁed ‘‘he who cometh 
in peace’’ because he visited the sick to give them ‘‘peaceful sleep.’’ This early physician practiced his 
art so well that he was deiﬁed in the Egyptian culture as the god of healing.

Egyptian mythology, like primitive religion, emphasized the interrelationships between the supernatural and 
one’s health. For example, consider the mystic sign Rx, which still adorns all prescriptions today. It has a 
mythical origin in the legend of the Eye of Horus. It appears that as a child Horus lost his vision after 
being viciously attacked by Seth, the demon of evil. Then Isis, the mother of Horus, called for assistance 
to Thoth, the most important god of health, who promptly restored the eye and its powers. Because of this 
intervention, the Eye of Horus became the Egyptian symbol of godly protection and recovery, and its 
descendant, Rx, serves as the most visible link between ancient and modern medicine.

The concepts and practices of Imhotep and the medical cult he fostered were duly recorded on papyri and 
stored in ancient tombs. One scroll (dated c. 1500 BC ), acquired by George Elbers in 1873, contains 
hundreds of remedies for numerous afﬂictions ranging from crocodile bite to constipation. A second famous 
papyrus (dated c. 1700 BC ), discovered by Edwin Smith in 1862, is considered to be the most important and 
complete treatise on surgery of all antiquity. These writings outline proper diagnoses, prognoses, and 
treatment in a series of surgical cases. These two papyri are certainly among the outstanding writings in 
medical history.

As the inﬂuence of ancient Egypt spread, Imhotep was identiﬁed by the Greeks with their own god of 
healing, Aesculapius. According to legend, the god Apollo fathered Aesculapius during one of his many 
earthly visits. Apparently Apollo was a concerned parent, and, as is the case for many modern parents, he 
wanted his son to be a physician. He made Chiron, the centaur, tutor Aesculapius in the ways of healing. 
Chiron’s student became so proﬁcient as a healer that he soon surpassed his tutor and kept people so 
healthy that he began to decrease the population of Hades. Pluto, the god of the underworld, complained so 
violently about this course of events that Zeus killed Aesculapius with a thunderbolt and in the process 
promoted Aesculapius to Olympus as a god.

Inevitably, mythology has become entangled with historical facts, and it is not certain whether Aesculapius 
was in fact an earthly physician like Imhotep, the Egyptian. However, one thing is clear; by 1000 BC , 
medicine was already a highly respected profession. In Greece, the Aesculapia were temples of the healing 
cult and may be considered among the ﬁrst hospitals (Fig. 1.1). In modern terms, these temples were 
essentially sanatoriums that had strong religious overtones. In them, patients

were received and psychologically prepared, through prayer and sacriﬁce, to appreciate the past 
achievements of Aesculapius and his physician priests. After the appropriate rituals, they were allowed to 
enjoy ‘‘temple sleep.’’ During the night, ‘‘healers’’ visited their patients, administering medical advice 
to clients who were awake or interpreting dreams of those who had slept. In this way, patients became 
convinced that they would be cured by following the prescribed regimen of diet, drugs, or bloodletting. On 
the other hand, if they remained ill, it would be attributed to their lack of faith. With this approach, 
patients, not treatments, were at fault if they did not get well. This early use of the power of suggestion 
was effective then and is still important in medical treatment today. The notion of ‘‘healthy mind, healthy 
body’’ is still in vogue today.

One of the most celebrated of these ‘‘healing’’ temples was on the island of Cos, the birthplace of 
Hippocrates, who as a youth became acquainted with the curative arts through his father, also a physician. 
Hippocrates was not so much an innovative physician as a collector of all the remedies and techniques that 
existed up to that time. Since he viewed the physician as a scientist instead of a priest, Hippocrates also 
injected an essential ingredient into medicine: its scientiﬁc spirit. For him, diagnostic

observation and clinical treatment began to replace superstition. Instead of blaming disease on the gods, 
Hippocrates taught that disease was a natural process, one that developed in logical steps, and that 
symptoms were reactions of the body to disease. The body itself, he emphasized, possessed its own means of 
recovery, and the function of the physician was to aid these natural forces. Hippocrates treated each 
patient as an original case to be studied and documented. His shrewd descriptions of diseases are models for 
physicians even today. Hippocrates and the school of Cos trained a number of individuals who then migrated 
to the corners of the Mediterranean world to practice medicine and spread the philosophies of their 
preceptor. The work of Hippocrates and the school and tradition that stem from him constitute the ﬁrst real 
break from magic and mysticism and the foundation of the rational art of medicine. However, as a 
practitioner, Hippocrates represented the spirit, not the science, of medicine, embodying the good 
physician: the friend of the patient and the humane expert.

As the Roman Empire reached its zenith and its inﬂuence expanded across half the world, it became heir to 
the great cultures it absorbed, including their medical advances. Although the Romans themselves did little 
to advance clinical medicine (the treatment of the individual patient), they did make outstanding 
contributions to public health. For example, they had a well-organized army medical service, which not only 
accompanied the legions on their various campaigns to provide ‘‘ﬁrst aid’’ on the battleﬁeld but also 
established ‘‘base hospitals’’ for convalescents at strategic points throughout the empire. The construction 
of sewer systems and aqueducts were truly remarkable Roman accomplishments that provided their empire with 
the medical and social advantages of sanitary living. Insistence on clean drinking water and unadulterated 
foods affected the control and prevention of epidemics, and however primitive, made urban existence 
possible. Unfortunately, without adequate scientiﬁc knowledge about diseases, all the preoccupation of the 
Romans with public health could not avert the periodic medical disasters, particularly the plague, that 
mercilessly befell its citizens.

Initially, the Roman masters looked upon Greek physicians and their art with disfavor. However, as the years 
passed, the favorable impression these disciples of Hippocrates made upon the people became widespread. As a 
reward for their service to the peoples of the Empire, Caesar (46 BC ) granted Roman citizenship to all 
Greek practitioners of medicine in his empire. Their new status became so secure that when Rome suffered 
from famine that same year, these Greek practitioners were the only foreigners not expelled from the city. 
On the contrary, they were even offered bonuses to stay!

Ironically, Galen, who is considered the greatest physician in the history of Rome, was himself a Greek. 
Honored by the emperor for curing his ‘‘imperial fever,’’ Galen became the medical celebrity of Rome. He was 
arrogant and a braggart and, unlike Hippocrates, reported only successful cases. Nevertheless, he was a 
remarkable physician. For Galen, diagnosis became a ﬁne art; in addition to taking care of his own 
patients, he responded to requests for medical advice from the far reaches of the empire. He was so 
industrious that he wrote more than 300 books of anatomical observations, which included selected case 
histories, the drugs he prescribed, and his

boasts. His version of human anatomy, however, was misleading because he objected to human dissection and 
drew his human analogies solely from the studies of animals. However, because he so dominated the medical 
scene and was later endorsed by the Roman Catholic Church, Galen actually inhibited medical inquiry. His 
medical views and writings became both the ‘‘bible’’ and ‘‘the law’’ for the pontiffs and pundits of the 
ensuing Dark Ages.

With the collapse of the Roman Empire, the Church became the repository of knowledge, particularly of all 
scholarship that had drifted through the centuries into the Mediterranean. This body of information, 
including medical knowledge, was literally scattered through the monasteries and dispersed among the many 
orders of the Church.

The teachings of the early Roman Catholic Church and the belief in divine mercy made inquiry into the causes 
of death unnecessary and even undesirable. Members of the Church regarded curing patients by rational 
methods as sinful interference with the will of God. The employment of drugs signiﬁed a lack of faith by 
the doctor and patient, and scientiﬁc medicine fell into disrepute. Therefore, for almost a thousand years, 
medical research stagnated. It was not until the Renaissance in the 1500s that any signiﬁcant progress in 
the science of medicine occurred. Hippocrates had once taught that illness was not a punishment sent by the 
gods but a phenomenon of nature. Now, under the Church and a new God, the older views of the supernatural 
origins of disease were renewed and promulgated. Since disease implied demonic possession, monks and priests 
treated the sick through prayer, the laying on of hands, exorcism, penances, and exhibition of holy 
relics—practices ofﬁcially sanctioned by the Church.

Although deﬁcient in medical knowledge, the Dark Ages were not entirely lacking in charity toward the sick 
poor. Christian physicians often treated the rich and poor alike, and the Church assumed responsibility for 
the sick. Furthermore, the evolution of the modern hospital actually began with the advent of Christianity 
and is considered one of the major contributions of monastic medicine. With the rise in 335 AD of 
Constantine I, the ﬁrst of the Roman emperors to embrace Christianity, all pagan temples of healing were 
closed, and hospitals were established in every cathedral city. [Note: The word hospital comes from the 
Latin hospes, meaning, ‘‘host’’ or ‘‘guest.’’ The same root has provided hotel and hostel.] These ﬁrst 
hospitals were simply houses where weary travelers and the sick could ﬁnd food, lodging, and nursing care. 
The Church ran these hospitals, and the attending monks and nuns practiced the art of healing.

As the Christian ethic of faith, humanitarianism, and charity spread throughout Europe and then to the 
Middle East during the Crusades, so did its hospital system. However, trained ‘‘physicians’’ still practiced 
their trade primarily in the homes of their patients, and only the weary travelers, the destitute, and those 
considered hopeless cases found their way to hospitals. Conditions in these early hospitals varied widely. 
Although a few were well ﬁnanced and well managed and treated their patients humanely, most were 
essentially custodial institutions to keep troublesome and infectious people away from the general public. 
In these establishments, crowding, ﬁlth, and high mortality among both patients and attendants were 
commonplace. Thus, the hospital was viewed as an institution to be feared and shunned.

The Renaissance and Reformation in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries loosened the Church’s stronghold on 
both the hospital and the conduct of medical practice. During the Renaissance, ‘‘true learning’’—the desire 
to pursue the true secrets of nature, including medical knowledge—was again stimulated. The study of human 
anatomy was advanced and the seeds for further studies were planted by the artists Michelangelo, Raphael, 
Durer, and, of course, the genius Leonardo da Vinci. They viewed the human body as it really was, not simply 
as a text passage from Galen. The painters of the Renaissance depicted people in sickness and pain, sketched 
in great detail, and in the process, demonstrated amazing insight into the workings of the heart, lungs, 
brain, and muscle structure. They also attempted to portray the individual and to discover emotional as well 
as physical qualities. In this stimulating era, physicians began to approach their patients and the pursuit 
of medical knowledge in similar fashion. New medical schools, similar to the most famous of such 
institutions at Salerno, Bologna, Montpelier, Padua, and Oxford, emerged. These medical training centers 
once again embraced the Hippocratic doctrine that the patient was human, disease was a natural process, and 
commonsense therapies were appropriate in assisting the body to conquer its disease.

During the Renaissance, fundamentals received closer examination and the age of measurement began. In 1592, 
when Galileo visited Padua, Italy, he lectured on mathematics to a large audience of medical students. His 
famous theories and inventions (the thermoscope and the pendulum, in addition to the telescopic lens) were 
expounded upon and demonstrated. Using these devices, one of his students, Sanctorius, made comparative 
studies of the human temperature and pulse. A future graduate of Padua, William Harvey, later applied 
Galileo’s laws of motion and mechanics to the problem of blood circulation. This ability to measure the 
amount of blood moving through the arteries helped to determine the function of the heart.

Galileo encouraged the use of experimentation and exact measurement as scientiﬁc tools that could provide 
physicians with an effective check against reckless speculation. Quantiﬁcation meant theories would be 
veriﬁed before being accepted. Individuals involved in medical research incorporated these new methods into 
their activities. Body temperature and pulse rate became measures that could be related to other symptoms to 
assist the physician in diagnosing speciﬁc illnesses or disease. Concurrently, the development of the 
microscope ampliﬁed human vision, and an unknown world came into focus. Unfortunately, new scientiﬁc 
devices had little effect on the average physician, who continued to blood-let and to disperse noxious 
ointments. Only in the universities did scientiﬁc groups band together to pool their instruments and their 
various talents.

In England, the medical profession found in Henry VIII a forceful and sympathetic patron. He assisted the 
doctors in their ﬁght against malpractice and supported the establishment of the College of Physicians, the 
oldest purely medical institution in Europe. When he suppressed the monastery system in the early sixteenth 
century, church hospitals were taken over by the cities in which they were located. Consequently, a network 
of private, nonproﬁt, voluntary hospitals came into being. Doctors and medical students replaced the 
nursing sisters and monk physicians. Consequently, the professional nursing class became almost nonexistent 
in these public institutions.

Only among the religious orders did nursing remain intact, further compounding the poor lot of patients 
conﬁned within the walls of the public hospitals. These conditions were to continue until Florence 
Nightingale appeared on the scene years later.

Still another dramatic event occurred. The demands made upon England’s hospitals, especially the urban 
hospitals, became overwhelming as the population of these urban centers continued to expand. It was 
impossible for the facilities to accommodate the needs of so many. Therefore, during the seventeenth century 
two of the major urban hospitals in London, St. Bartholomew’s and St. Thomas, initiated a policy of 
admitting and attending to only those patients who could possibly be cured. The incurables were left to meet 
their destiny in other institutions such as asylums, prisons, or almshouses.

Humanitarian and democratic movements occupied center stage primarily in France and the American colonies 
during the eighteenth century. The notion of equal rights ﬁnally arose, and as urbanization spread, 
American society concerned itself with the welfare of many of its members. Medical men broadened the scope 
of their services to include the ‘‘unfortunates’’ of society and helped to ease their suffering by 
advocating the power of reason and spearheading prison reform, child care, and the hospital movement. 
Ironically, as the hospital began to take up an active, curative role in medical care in the eighteenth 
century, the death rate among its patients did not decline but continued to be excessive. In 1788, for 
example, the death rate among the patients at the Hotel Dru in Paris, thought to be founded in the seventh 
century and the oldest hospital in existence today, was nearly 25%. These hospitals were lethal not only to 
patients, but also to the attendants working in them, whose own death rate hovered between 6 and 12% per 
year.

Essentially, the hospital remained a place to avoid. Under these circumstances, it is not surprising that 
the ﬁrst American colonists postponed or delayed building hospitals. For example, the ﬁrst hospital in 
America, the Pennsylvania Hospital, was not built until 1751, and the City of Boston took over two hundred 
years to erect its ﬁrst hospital, the Massachusetts General, which opened its doors to the public in 1821.

Not until the nineteenth century could hospitals claim to beneﬁt any signiﬁcant number of patients. This 
era of progress was due primarily to the improved nursing practices fostered by Florence Nightingale on her 
return to England from the Crimean War (Fig. 1.2). She demonstrated that hospital deaths were caused more 
frequently by hospital conditions than by disease. During the latter part of the nineteenth century she was 
at the height of her inﬂuence, and few new hospitals were built anywhere in the world without her advice. 
During the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century Nightingale forced medical attention to focus once more on 
the care of the patient. Enthusiastically and philosophically, she expressed her views on nursing: ‘‘Nursing 
is putting us in the best possible condition for nature to restore and preserve health. . . . The art is 
that of nursing the sick. Please mark, not nursing sickness.’’

Although these efforts were signiﬁcant, hospitals remained, until this century, institutions for the sick 
poor. In the 1870s, for example, when the plans for the projected Johns Hopkins Hospital were reviewed, it 
was considered quite appropriate to allocate 324 charity and 24 pay beds. Not only did the hospital 
population before the turn of the century represent a narrow portion of the socioeconomic spectrum,

but it also represented only a limited number of the type of diseases prevalent in the overall population. 
In 1873, for example, roughly half of America’s hospitals did not admit contagious diseases, and many others 
would not admit incurables. Furthermore, in this period, surgery admissions in general hospitals constituted 
only 5%, with trauma (injuries incurred by traumatic experience) making up a good portion of these cases.

American hospitals a century ago were rather simple in that their organization required no special 
provisions for research or technology and demanded only cooking

and washing facilities. In addition, since the attending and consulting physicians were normally unsalaried 
and the nursing costs were quite modest, the great bulk of the hospital’s normal operation expenses were for 
food, drugs, and utilities. Not until the twentieth century did modern medicine come of age in the United 
States. As we shall see, technology played a signiﬁcant role in its evolution.

1.2 THE MODERN HEALTH CARE SYSTEM

Modern medical practice actually began at the turn of the twentieth century. Before 1900, medicine had 
little to offer the average citizen since its resources were mainly physicians, their education, and their 
little black bags. At this time physicians were in short supply, but for different reasons than exist today. 
Costs were minimal, demand small, and many of the services provided by the physician also could be obtained 
from experienced amateurs residing in the community. The individual’s dwelling was the major site for 
treatment and recuperation, and relatives and neighbors constituted an able and willing nursing staff. 
Midwives delivered babies, and those illnesses not cured by home remedies were left to run their fatal 
course. Only in the twentieth century did the tremendous explosion in scientiﬁc knowledge and technology 
lead to the development of the American health care system with the hospital as its focal point and the 
specialist physician and nurse as its most visible operatives.

In the twentieth century, advances in the basic sciences (chemistry, physiology, pharmacology, and so on) 
began to occur much more rapidly. It was an era of intense interdisciplinary cross-fertilization. 
Discoveries in the physical sciences enabled medical researchers to take giant strides forward. For example, 
in 1903 William Einthoven devised the ﬁrst electrocardiograph and measured the electrical changes that 
occurred during the beating of the heart. In the process, Einthoven initiated a new age for both 
cardiovascular medicine and electrical measurement techniques.

Of all the new discoveries that followed one another like intermediates in a chain reaction, the most 
signiﬁcant for clinical medicine was the development of x-rays. When W.K. Roentgen described his ‘‘new 
kinds of rays,’’ the human body was opened to medical inspection. Initially these x-rays were used in the 
diagnosis of bone fractures and dislocations. In the United States, x-ray machines brought this modern 
technology to most urban hospitals. In the process, separate departments of radiology were established, and 
the inﬂuence of their activities spread, with almost every department of medicine (surgery, gynecology, and 
so forth) advancing with the aid of this new tool. By the 1930s, x-ray visualization of practically all the 
organ systems of the body was possible by the use of barium salts and a wide variety of radiopaque 
materials.

The power this technological innovation gave physicians was enormous. The x-ray permitted them to diagnose a 
wide variety of diseases and injuries accurately. In addition, being within the hospital, it helped trigger 
the transformation of the hospital from a passive receptacle for the sick poor to an active curative 
institution for all citizens of the American society.

The introduction of sulfanilamide in the mid-1930s and penicillin in the early 1940s signiﬁcantly reduced 
the main danger of hospitalization: cross infection among

patients. With these new drugs in their arsenals, surgeons were able to perform their operations without 
prohibitive morbidity and mortality due to infection. Also consider that, even though the different blood 
groups and their incompatibility were discovered in 1900 and sodium citrate was used in 1913 to prevent 
clotting, the full development of blood banks was not practical until the 1930s when technology provided 
adequate refrigeration. Until that time, ‘‘fresh’’ donors were bled, and the blood was transfused while it 
was still warm.

As technology in the United States blossomed so did the prestige of American medicine. From 1900 to 1929 
Nobel Prize winners in physiology or medicine came primarily from Europe, with no American among them. In 
the period 1930 to 1944, just before the end of World War II, seven Americans were honored with this award. 
During the post-war period of 1945 to 1975, 37 American life scientists earned similar honors, and from 
1975–2003, the number was 40. Thus, since 1930 a total of 79 American scientists have performed research 
signiﬁcant enough to warrant the distinction of a Nobel Prize. Most of these efforts were made possible by 
the technology (Fig. 1.3) available to these clinical scientists.

The employment of the available technology assisted in advancing the development of complex surgical 
procedures (Fig. 1.4). The Drinker respirator was introduced in 1927 and the ﬁrst heart–lung bypass in 
1939. In the 1940s, cardiac catheterization and angiography (the use of a cannula threaded through an arm 
vein

and into the heart with the injection of radiopaque dye for the x-ray visualization of lung and heart 
vessels and valves) were developed. Accurate diagnoses of congenital and acquired heart disease (mainly 
valve disorders due to rheumatic fever) also became possible, and a new era of cardiac and vascular surgery 
began.

Another child of this modern technology, the electron microscope, entered the medical scene in the 1950s and 
provided signiﬁcant advances in visualizing relatively small cells. Body scanners to detect tumors arose 
from the same science that brought societies reluctantly into the atomic age. These ‘‘tumor detectives’’ 
used radioactive material and became commonplace in newly established departments of nuclear medicine in all 
hospitals.

The impact of these discoveries and many others was profound. The health care system that consisted 
primarily of the ‘‘horse and buggy’’ physician was gone forever, replaced by the doctor backed by and 
centered around the hospital, as medicine began to change to accommodate the new technology.

Following World War II, the evolution of comprehensive care greatly accelerated. The advanced technology 
that had been developed in the pursuit of military objectives

now became available for peaceful applications with the medical profession beneﬁting greatly from this 
rapid surge of technological ﬁnds. For instance, the realm of electronics came into prominence. The 
techniques for following enemy ships and planes, as well as providing aviators with information concerning 
altitude, air speed, and the like, were now used extensively in medicine to follow the subtle electrical 
behavior of the fundamental unit of the central nervous system, the neuron, or to monitor the beating heart 
of a patient.

Science and technology have leap-frogged past one another throughout recorded history. Anyone seeking a 
causal relation between the two was just as likely to ﬁnd technology the cause and science the effect as to 
ﬁnd science the cause and technology the effect. As gunnery led to ballistics, and the steam engine to 
thermodynamics, so powered ﬂight led to aerodynamics. However, with the advent of electronics this causal 
relationbetweentechnologyandsciencechangedtoasystematicexploitationofscientiﬁc research and the pursuit of 
knowledge that was undertaken with technical uses in mind.

The list becomes endless when one reﬂects upon the devices produced by the same technology that permitted 
humans to stand on the moon. What was considered science ﬁction in the 1930s and the 1940s became reality. 
Devices continually changed to incorporate the latest innovations, which in many cases became outmoded in a 
very short period of time. Telemetry devices used to monitor the activity of a patient’s heart freed both 
the physician and the patient from the wires that previously restricted them to the four walls of the 
hospital room. Computers, similar to those that controlled the ﬂight plans of the Apollo capsules, now 
completely inundate our society. Since the 1970s, medical researchers have put these electronic brains to 
work performing complex calculations, keeping records (via artiﬁcial intelligence), and even controlling 
the very instrumentation that sustains life. The development of new medical imaging techniques (Fig. 1.5) 
such as computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) totally depended on a continually 
advancing computer technology. The citations and technological discoveries are so myriad it is impossible to 
mention them all.

‘‘Spare parts’’ surgery is now routine. With the ﬁrst successful transplantation of a kidney in 1954, the 
concept of artiﬁcial organs gained acceptance and ofﬁcially came into vogue in the medical arena (Fig. 
1.6). Technology to provide prosthetic devices such as artiﬁcial heart valves and artiﬁcial blood vessels 
developed. Even an artiﬁcial heart program to develop a replacement for a defective or diseased human heart 
began. Although, to date, the results have not been satisfactory, this program has provided ‘‘ventricular 
assistance’’ for those who need it. These technological innovations radically altered surgical organization 
and utilization. The comparison of a hospital in which surgery was a relatively minor activity as it was a 
century ago to the contemporary hospital in which surgery plays a prominent role dramatically suggests the 
manner in which this technological effort has revolutionized the health profession and the institution of 
the hospital.

Through this evolutionary process, the hospital became the central institution that provided medical care. 
Because of the complex and expensive technology that could be based only in the hospital and the education 
of doctors oriented both as clinicians and investigators toward highly technological norms, both the patient 
and the

physician were pushed even closer to this center of attraction. In addition, the effects of the increasing 
maldistribution and apparent shortage of physicians during the 1950s and 1960s also forced the patient and 
the physician to turn increasingly to the ambulatory clinic and the emergency ward of the urban hospital in 
time of need.

Emergency wards today handle not only an ever-increasing number of accidents (largely related to alcohol and 
the automobile) and somatic crises such as heart attacks and strokes, but also problems resulting from the 
social environments that surround the local hospital. Respiratory complaints, cuts, bumps, and minor trauma 
constitute a signiﬁcant number of the cases seen in a given day. Added to these individuals are those who 
live in the neighborhood of the hospital and simply cannot afford their own physician. Often such 
individuals enter the emergency ward for routine care of colds, hangovers, and even marital problems. 
Because of these developments, the hospital has evolved as the focal point of the present system of health 
care delivery. The hospital, as presently organized, specializes in highly technical and complex medical 
procedures. This evolutionary process became inevitable as technology produced increasingly sophisticated 
equipment that private practitioners or even large group practices were economically unequipped to acquire 
and maintain. Only the hospital could provide this type of service. The steady expansion of scientiﬁc and 
technological innovations has not only necessitated specialization for all health professionals (physicians, 
nurses, and technicians) but has also required the housing of advanced technology within the walls of the 
modern hospital.

In recent years, technology has struck medicine like a thunderbolt. The Human Genome Project was perhaps the 
most prominent scientiﬁc and technological effort of the 1990s. Some of the engineering products vital to 
the effort included automatic sequencers, robotic liquid handling devices, and software for databasing and 
sequence assembly. As a result, a major transition occurred, moving biomedical engineering to focus on the 
cellular and molecular level rather than solely on the organ system level. With the success of the genome 
project, new vistas have been opened (e.g., it is now possible to create individual medications based on 
one’s DNA) (Fig. 1.7). Advances in nanotechnology, tissue engineering, and artiﬁcial organs are clear 
indications that science ﬁction will continue to become reality. However, the social and economic 
consequences of this vast outpouring of information and innovation must be fully understood if this 
technology is to be exploited effectively and efﬁciently.

As one gazes into the crystal ball, technology offers great potential for affecting health care practices 
(Fig. 1.8). It can provide health care for individuals in remote rural areas by means of closed-circuit 
television health clinics with complete communication links to a regional health center. Development of 
multiphasic screening

systems can provide preventive medicine to the vast majority of the population and restrict admission to the 
hospital to those needing the diagnostic and treatment facilities housed there. Automation of patient and 
nursing records can inform physicians of the status of patients during their stay at the hospital and in 
their homes. With the creation of a central medical records system, anyone who changes residences or becomes 
ill away from home can have records made available to the attending physician easily and rapidly. Tissue 
engineering—the application of biological, chemical, and engineering principles towards the repair, 
restoration, and regeneration of living tissue using biomaterials, cells, and factors alone or in 
combinations—has gained a great deal of attention and is projected to grow exponentially in the ﬁrst 
quarter of the twenty-ﬁrst century. These are just a few of the possibilities that illustrate the potential 
of technology in creating the type of medical care system that will indeed be accessible, of high quality, 
and reasonably priced for all. [Note: for an extensive review of major events in the evolution of biomedical 
engineering see Nebekar, 2002.]

1.3 WHAT IS BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING?

Many of the problems confronting health professionals today are of extreme importance to the engineer 
because they involve the fundamental aspects of device and systems analysis, design, and practical 
application—all of which lie at the heart of processes that are fundamental to engineering practice. These 
medically relevant design problems can range from very complex large-scale constructs, such as the design 
and implementation of automated clinical laboratories, multiphasic screening facilities (i.e., centers that 
permit many tests to be conducted), and hospital information systems, to the creation of relatively small 
and simple devices, such as recording electrodes and transducers that may be used to monitor the activity of 
speciﬁc physiological processes in either a research or clinical setting. They encompass the many 
complexities of remote monitoring and telemetry and include the requirements of emergency vehicles, 
operating rooms, and intensive care units.

The American health care system, therefore, encompasses many problems that represent challenges to certain 
members of the engineering profession called biomedical engineers. Since biomedical engineering involves 
applying the concepts, knowledge, and approaches of virtually all engineering disciplines (e.g., electrical, 
mechanical, and chemical engineering) to solve speciﬁc health care related problems, the opportunities for 
interaction between engineers and health care professionals are many and varied.

Biomedical engineers may become involved, for example, in the design of a new medical imaging modality or 
development of new medical prosthetic devices to aid people with disabilities. Although what is included in 
the ﬁeld of biomedical engineering is considered by many to be quite clear, many conﬂicting opinions 
concerning the ﬁeld can be traced to disagreements about its deﬁnition. For example, consider the terms 
biomedical engineering, bioengineering, biological engineering, and clinical (or medical) engineer, which 
are deﬁned in the Bioengineering Education Directory. Although Pacela deﬁned bioengineering as the broad 
umbrella term used to describe

this entire ﬁeld, bioengineering is usually deﬁned as a basic-research-oriented activity closely related 
to biotechnology and genetic engineering, that is, the modiﬁcation of animal or plant cells or parts of 
cells to improve plants or animals or to develop new microorganisms for beneﬁcial ends. In the food 
industry, for example, this has meant the improvement of strains of yeast for fermentation. In agriculture, 
bioengineers may be concerned with the improvement of crop yields by treating plants with organisms to 
reduce frost damage. It is clear that bioengineers for the future will have tremendous impact on the quality 
of human life. The full potential of this specialty is difﬁcult to imagine. Typical pursuits include the 
following:

& & & &

& & & &

Development of improved species of plants and animals for food production Invention of new medical 
diagnostic tests for diseases Production of synthetic vaccines from clone cells Bioenvironmental engineering 
to protect human, animal, and plant life from toxicants and pollutants Study of protein-surface interactions 
Modeling of the growth kinetics of yeast and hybridoma cells Research in immobilized enzyme technology 
Development of therapeutic proteins and monoclonal antibodies

The term biomedical engineering appears to have the most comprehensive meaning. Biomedical engineers apply 
electrical, chemical, optical, mechanical, and other engineering principles to understand, modify, or 
control biological (i.e., human and animal) systems. Biomedical engineers working within a hospital or 
clinic are more properly called clinical engineers, but this theoretical distinction is not always observed 
in practice, and many professionals working within U.S. hospitals today continue to be called biomedical 
engineers.

The breadth of activity of biomedical engineers is signiﬁcant. The ﬁeld has moved from being concerned 
primarily with the development of medical devices in the 1950s and 1960s to include a more wide-ranging set 
of activities. As illustrated in Figure 1.9, the ﬁeld of biomedical engineering now includes many new 
career areas.

These areas include

&

&

& &

& &

&

Application of engineering system analysis (physiologic modeling, simulation, and control to biological 
problems Detection, measurement, and monitoring of physiologic signals (i.e., biosensors and biomedical 
instrumentation) Diagnostic interpretation via signal-processing techniques of bioelectric data Therapeutic 
and rehabilitation procedures and devices (rehabilitation engineering) Devices for replacement or 
augmentation of bodily functions (artiﬁcial organs) Computer analysis of patient-related data and clinical 
decision making (i.e., medical informatics and artiﬁcial intelligence) Medical imaging; that is, the 
graphical display of anatomic detail or physiologic function

&

The creation of new biologic products (i.e., biotechnology and tissue engineering)

Typical pursuits of biomedical engineers include

& & & & & & & & & & & & & &

Research in new materials for implanted artiﬁcial organs Development of new diagnostic instruments for 
blood analysis Writing software for analysis of medical research data Analysis of medical device hazards for 
safety and efﬁcacy Development of new diagnostic imaging systems Design of telemetry systems for patient 
monitoring Design of biomedical sensors Development of expert systems for diagnosis and treatment of 
diseases Design of closed-loop control systems for drug administration Modeling of the physiologic systems 
of the human body Design of instrumentation for sports medicine Development of new dental materials Design 
of communication aids for individuals with disabilities Study of pulmonary ﬂuid dynamics

& &

Study of biomechanics of the human body Development of material to be used as replacement for human skin

The preceding list is not intended to be all-inclusive. Many other applications use the talents and skills 
of the biomedical engineer. In fact, the list of biomedical engineers’ activities depends on the medical 
environment in which they work. This is especially true for clinical engineers, biomedical engineers 
employed in hospitals or clinical settings. Clinical engineers are essentially responsible for all the 
high-technology instruments and systems used in hospitals today; for the training of medical personnel in 
equipment safety; and for the design, selection, and use of technology to deliver safe and effective health 
care.

Engineers were ﬁrst encouraged to enter the clinical scene during the late 1960s in response to concerns 
about the electrical safety of hospital patients. This safety scare reached its peak when consumer 
activists, most notably Ralph Nader, claimed that ‘‘at the very least, 1,200 Americans are electrocuted 
annually during routine diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in hospitals.’’ This concern was based 
primarily on the supposition that catheterized patients with a low-resistance conducting pathway from 
outside the body into blood vessels near the heart could be electrocuted by voltage differences well below 
the normal level of sensation. Despite the lack of statistical evidence to substantiate these claims, this 
outcry served to raise the level of consciousness of health care professionals with respect to the safe use 
of medical devices.

In response to this concern, a new industry—hospital electrical safety—arose almost overnight. Organizations 
such as the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) wrote standards addressing electrical safety in 
hospitals. Electrical safety analyzer manufacturers and equipment safety consultants became eager to serve 
the needs of various hospitals that wanted to provide a ‘‘safety ﬁx,’’ and some companies developed new 
products to ensure patient safety, particularly those specializing in power distribution systems (most 
notably isolation transformers). To alleviate these fears, the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of 
Healthcare Organizations (then known as the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals) turned to NFPA 
codes as the standard for electrical safety and further speciﬁed that hospitals must inspect all equipment 
used on or near a patient for electrical safety at least every six months. To meet this new requirement 
hospital administrators considered a number of options, including: (1) paying medical device manufacturers 
to perform these electrical safety inspections, (2) contracting for the services of shared-services 
organizations, or (3) providing these services with in-house staff. When faced with this decision, most 
large hospitals opted for in-house service and created whole departments to provide the technological 
support necessary to address these electrical safety concerns.

As a result, a new engineering discipline—clinical engineering—was born. Many hospitals established 
centralized clinical engineering departments. Once these departments were in place, however, it soon became 
obvious that electrical safety failures represented only a small part of the overall problem posed by the 
presence of medical equipment in the clinical environment. At the time, this equipment was neither totally 
understood nor properly maintained. Simple visual inspections often revealed broken

knobs, frayed wires, and even evidence of liquid spills. Many devices did not perform in accordance with 
manufacturers’ speciﬁcations and were not maintained in accordance with manufacturers’ recommendations. In 
short, electrical safety problems were only the tip of the iceberg. By the mid-1970s, complete performance 
inspections before and after equipment use became the norm and sensible inspection procedures were 
developed. In the process, these clinical engineering pioneers began to play a more substantial role within 
the hospital. As new members of the hospital team, they

&

&

&

&

Became actively involved in developing cost-effective approaches for using medical technology Provided 
advice to hospital administrators regarding the purchase of medical equipment based on its ability to meet 
speciﬁc technical speciﬁcations Started utilizing modern scientiﬁc methods and working with 
standards-writing organizations Became involved in the training of health care personnel regarding the safe 
and efﬁcient use of medical equipment

Then, during the 1970s and 1980s, a major expansion of clinical engineering occurred, primarily due to the 
following events:

&

&

&

&

The Veterans’ Administration (VA), convinced that clinical engineers were vital to the overall operation of 
the VA hospital system, divided the country into biomedical engineering districts, with a chief biomedical 
engineer overseeing all engineering activities in the hospitals in that district.

Throughout the United States, clinical engineering departments were established in most large medical 
centers and hospitals and in some smaller clinical facilities with at least 300 beds.

Health care professionals (i.e., physicians and nurses) needed assistance in utilizing existing technology 
and incorporating new innovations.

Certiﬁcation of clinical engineers became a reality to ensure the continued competence of practicing 
clinical engineers.

During the 1990s, the evaluation of clinical engineering as a profession continued with the establishment of 
the American College of Clinical Engineering (ACCE) and the Clinical Engineering Division within the 
International Federation of Medical and Biological Engineering (IFMBE).

Clinical engineers today provide extensive engineering services for the clinical staff and serve as a 
signiﬁcant resource for the entire hospital (Fig. 1.10). Possessing indepth knowledge regarding available 
in-house technological capabilities as well as the technical resources available from outside ﬁrms, the 
modern clinical engineer enables the hospital to make effective and efﬁcient use of most if not all of its 
technological resources.

Biomedical engineering is thus an interdisciplinary branch of engineering heavily based both in engineering 
and in the life sciences. It ranges from theoretical, nonexperimental undertakings to state-of-the-art 
applications. It can encompass research, development, implementation, and operation. Accordingly, like 
medical practice itself, it is unlikely that any single person can acquire expertise that

encompasses the entire ﬁeld. As a result, there has been an explosion of biomedical engineering specialists 
to cover this broad spectrum of activity. Yet, because of the interdisciplinary nature of this activity, 
there is considerable interplay and overlapping of interest and effort between them. For example, biomedical 
engineers engaged in the development of biosensors may interact with those interested in prosthetic devices 
to develop a means to detect and use the same bioelectric signal to power a prosthetic device. Those engaged 
in automating the clinical chemistry laboratory may collaborate with those developing expert systems to 
assist clinicians in making clinical decisions based on speciﬁc laboratory data. The possibilities are 
endless.

Perhaps a greater potential beneﬁt occurring from the utilization of biomedical engineers is the 
identiﬁcation of problems and needs of our present health care delivery system that can be solved using 
existing engineering technology and systems methodology. Consequently, the ﬁeld of biomedical engineering 
offers hope in the continuing battle to provide high-quality health care at a reasonable cost. If properly 
directed towards solving problems related to preventive medical approaches, ambulatory care services, and 
the like, biomedical engineers can provide the tools and techniques to make our health care system more 
effective and efﬁcient.

1.4 ROLES PLAYED BY BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERS

In its broadest sense, biomedical engineering involves training essentially three types of individuals: (1) 
the clinical engineer in health care, (2) the biomedical design engineer for industry, and (3) the research 
scientist. Currently, one might also distinguish among three speciﬁc roles these biomedical engineers can 
play. Each is different enough to merit a separate description. The ﬁrst type, the most common, might be 
called the ‘‘problem solver.’’ This biomedical engineer (most likely the clinical engineer or biomedical 
design engineer) maintains the traditional service relationship with the life scientists who originate a 
problem that can be solved by applying the speciﬁc expertise of the engineer. For this problem-solving 
process to be efﬁcient and successful, however, some knowledge of each other’s language and a ready 
interchange of information must exist. Biomedical engineers must understand the biological situation to 
apply their judgment and contribute their knowledge toward the solution of the given problem as well as to 
defend their methods in terms that the life scientist can understand. If they are unable to do these things, 
they do not merit the ‘‘biomedical’’ appellation.

The second type, which is more rare, might be called the ‘‘technological entrepreneur’’ (most likely a 
biomedical design engineer in industry). This individual assumes that the gap between the technological 
education of the life scientist or physician and present technological capability has become so great that 
the life scientist cannot pose a problem that will incorporate the application of existing technology. 
Therefore, technological entrepreneurs examine some portion of the biological or medical front and identify 
areas in which advanced technology might be advantageous. Thus, they pose their own problem and then proceed 
to provide the solution, at ﬁrst conceptually and then in the form of hardware or software. Finally, these 
individuals must convince the medical community that they can provide a useful tool because, contrary to the 
situation in which problem solvers ﬁnd themselves, the entrepreneur’s activity is speculative at best and 
has no ready-made customer for the results. If the venture is successful, however, whether scientiﬁcally or 
commercially, then an advance has been made much earlier than it would have been through the conventional 
arrangement. Because of the nature of their work, technological entrepreneurs should have a great deal of 
engineering and medical knowledge as well as experience in numerous medical systems.

The third type of biomedical engineer, the ‘‘engineer–scientist’’ (most likely found in academic 
institutions and industrial research labs), is primarily interested in applying engineering concepts and 
techniques to the investigation and exploration of biological processes. The most powerful tool at their 
disposal is the construction of an appropriate physical or mathematical model of the speciﬁc biological 
system under study. Through simulation techniques and available computing machinery, they can use this model 
to understand features that are too complex for either analytical computation or intuitive recognition. In 
addition, this process of simulation facilitates the design of appropriate experiments that can be performed 
on the actual biological system. The results of these experiments can, in turn, be used to amend the model.

Thus, increased understanding of a biological mechanism results from this iterative process.

This mathematical model can also predict the effect of these changes on a biological system in cases where 
the actual experiments may be tedious, very difﬁcult, or dangerous. The researchers are thus rewarded with 
a better understanding of the biological system, and the mathematical description forms a compact, precise 
language that is easily communicated to others. The activities of the engineer–scientist inevitably involve 
instrument development because the exploitation of sophisticated measurement techniques is often necessary 
to perform the biological side of the experimental work. It is essential that engineer–scientists work in a 
biological environment, particularly when their work may ultimately have a clinical application. It is not 
enough to emphasize the niceties of mathematical analysis while losing the clinical relevance in the 
process. This biomedical engineer is a true partner of the biological scientist and has become an integral 
part of the research teams being formed in many institutes to develop techniques and experiments that will 
unfold the mysteries of the human organism. Each of these roles envisioned for the biomedical engineer 
requires a different attitude, as well as a speciﬁc degree of knowledge about the biological environment. 
However, each engineer must be a skilled professional with a signiﬁcant expertise in engineering 
technology. Therefore, in preparing new professionals to enter this ﬁeld at these various levels, 
biomedical engineering educational programs are continually being challenged to develop curricula that will 
provide an adequate exposure to and knowledge about the environment, without sacriﬁcing essential 
engineering skills. As we continue to move into a period characterized by a rapidly growing aging 
population, rising social and economic expectations, and a need for the development of more adequate 
techniques for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disease, development and employment of biomedical 
engineers have become a necessity. This is true not only because they may provide an opportunity to increase 
our knowledge of living systems, but also because they constitute promising vehicles for expediting the 
conversion of knowledge to effective action.

The ultimate role of the biomedical engineer, like that of the nurse and physician, is to serve society. 
This is a profession, not just a skilled technical service. To use this new breed effectively, health care 
practitioners and administrators should be aware of the needs for these new professionals and the roles for 
which they are being trained. The great potential, challenge, and promise in this endeavor offer not only 
signiﬁcant technological beneﬁts but also humanitarian beneﬁts.

1.5 PROFESSIONAL STATUS OF BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING

Biomedical engineers are professionals. Professionals have been deﬁned as an aggregate of people ﬁnding 
identity in sharing values and skills absorbed during a common course of intensive training. Whether 
individuals are professionals is determined by examining whether or not they have internalized certain given 
professional values. Furthermore, a professional is someone who has internalized professional values and is 
licensed on the basis of his or her technical competence. Professionals generally


accept scientiﬁc standards in their work, restrict their work activities to areas in which they are 
technically competent, avoid emotional involvement, cultivate objectivity in their work, and put their 
clients’ interests before their own.

The concept of a profession that is involved in the design, development, and management of medical 
technology encompasses three primary occupational models: science, business, and profession. Consider 
initially the contrast between science and profession. Science is seen as the pursuit of knowledge, its 
value hinging on providing evidence and communicating with colleagues. Profession, on the other hand, is 
viewed as providing a service to clients who have problems they cannot handle themselves. Scientists and 
professionals have in common the exercise of some knowledge, skill, or expertise. However, while scientists 
practice their skills and report their results to knowledgeable colleagues, professionals such as lawyers, 
physicians, and engineers serve lay clients. To protect both the professional and the client from the 
consequences of the layperson’s lack of knowledge, the practice of the profession is often regulated through 
such formal institutions as state licensing. Both professionals and scientists must persuade their clients 
to accept their ﬁndings. Professionals endorse and follow a speciﬁc code of ethics to serve society. On 
the other hand, scientists move their colleagues to accept their ﬁndings through persuasion.

Consider, for example, the medical profession. Its members are trained in caring for the sick, with the 
primary goal of healing them. These professionals not only have a responsibility for the creation, 
development, and implementation of that tradition, but they are also expected to provide a service to the 
public, within limits, without regard to self-interest. To ensure proper service, the profession closely 
monitors the licensing and certiﬁcation process. Thus, medical professionals themselves may be regarded as 
a mechanism of social control. However, this does not mean that other facets of society are not involved in 
exercising oversight and control of physicians in their practice of medicine.

A ﬁnal attribute of professionals is that of integrity. Physicians tend to be both permissive and 
supportive in relationships with patients and yet are often confronted with moral dilemmas involving the 
desires of their patients and social interest. For example, how to honor the wishes of terminally ill 
patients while not facilitating the patients’ deaths is a moral question that health professionals are 
forced to confront. A detailed discussion of the moral issues posed by medical technology is presented in 
Chapter 2.

One can determine the status of professionalization by noting the occurrence of six crucial events: (1) the 
ﬁrst training school; (2) the ﬁrst university school; (3) the ﬁrst local professional association; (4) 
the ﬁrst national professional association; (5) the ﬁrst state license law; and (6) the ﬁrst formal code 
of ethics.

The early appearances of the training school and the university afﬁliation underscore the importance of the 
cultivation of a knowledge base. The strategic innovative role of the universities and early teachers lies 
in linking knowledge to practice and creating a rationale for exclusive jurisdiction. Those practitioners 
pushing for prescribed training then form a professional association. The association deﬁnes the tasks of 
the profession: raising the quality of recruits; redeﬁning their function to permit the use of less 
technically skilled people to perform the more routine, less involved

tasks; and managing internal and external conﬂicts. In the process, internal conﬂict may arise between 
those committed to previously established procedures and newcomers committed to change and innovation. At 
this stage, some form of professional regulation, such as licensing or certiﬁcation, surfaces because of a 
belief that it will ensure minimum standards for the profession, enhance status, and protect the layperson 
in the process.

The last area of professional development is the establishment of a formal code of ethics, which usually 
includes rules to exclude unqualiﬁed and unscrupulous practitioners, rules to reduce internal competition, 
and rules to protect clients and emphasize the ideal service to society. A code of ethics usually comes at 
the end of the professionalization process.

In biomedical engineering, all six of these critical steps have been taken. The ﬁeld of biomedical 
engineering, which originated as a professional group interested primarily in medical electronics in the 
late 1950s, has grown from a few scattered individuals to a very well-established organization. There are 
approximately 48 international societies throughout the world serving an increasingly expanding community of 
biomedical engineers. Today, the scope of biomedical engineering is enormously diverse. Over the years, many 
new disciplines such as tissue engineering and artiﬁcial intelligence, which were once considered alien to 
the ﬁeld, are now an integral part of the profession.

Professional societies play a major role in bringing together members of this diverse community to share 
their knowledge and experience in pursuit of new technological applications that will improve the health and 
quality of life of human beings. Intersocietal cooperation and collaborations, both at national and 
international levels, are more actively fostered today through professional organizations such as the 
Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES), the American Institute of Medical and Biological Engineers (AIMBE), 
and the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic 
Engineers (IEEE).

1.6 PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES

1.6.1 American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering

The United States has the largest biomedical engineering community in the world. Major professional 
organizations that address various cross sections of the ﬁeld and serve biomedical engineering 
professionals include: (1) the American College of Clinical Engineering, (2) the American Institute of 
Chemical Engineers, (3) the American Medical Informatics Association, (4) the American Society of 
Agricultural Engineers, (5) the American Society for Artiﬁcial Internal Organs, (6) the American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, (7) the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, (8) the Biomedical 
Engineering Society, (9) the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, (10) an interdisciplinary 
Association for the Advancement of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies, and (11) the Society for 
Biomaterials. In an effort to unify all the disparate components of the biomedical engineering

community in the United States as represented by these various societies, the American Institute for Medical 
and Biological Engineering (AIMBE) was created in 1992. The primary goal of AIMBE is to serve as an umbrella 
organization in the United States for the purpose of unifying the bioengineering community, addressing 
public policy issues, and promoting the engineering approach in society’s effort to enhance health and 
quality of life through the judicious use of technology. For information, contact AIMBE, 1901 Pennsylvania 
Avenue N.W., Suite 401, Washington, D.C. 20006 (http://aimbe.org/; Email: info@aimbe.org).

1.6.2 IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society

The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) is the largest international professional 
organization in the world, and it accommodates 37 societies and councils under its umbrella structure. Of 
these 37, the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) represents the foremost international 
organization serving the needs of over 8000 biomedical engineering members around the world. The major 
interest of the EMBS encompasses the application of concepts and methods from the physical and engineering 
sciences to biology and medicine. Each year the society sponsors a major international conference while 
cosponsoring a number of theme-oriented regional conferences throughout the world. Premier publications 
consist of a monthly journal (Transactions on Biomedical Engineering), three quarterly journals 
(Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, Transactions on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine, and Transactions on Nanobioscience), and a bimonthly magazine (IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Magazine). Secondary publications, authored in collaboration with other societies, include 
Transactions on Medical Imaging, Transactions on Neural Networks, Transactions on Pattern Analysis, and 
Machine Intelligence. For more information, contact the IEEE EMBS Executive Ofﬁce, IEEE, 445 Hoes Lane, 
Piscataway, NJ, 08855–1331 USA (http://www.embs. org/; Email: emb-exec@ieee.org).

1.6.3 Biomedical Engineering Society

Established in 1968, the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) was founded to address a need for a society 
that afforded equal status to representatives of both biomedical and engineering interests. With that in 
mind, the primary goal of the BMES, as stated in their Articles of Incorporation, is ‘‘to promote the 
increase of biomedical engineering knowledge and its utilization.’’ Regular meetings are scheduled 
biannually in both the spring and fall. Additionally, special interest meetings are interspersed throughout 
the year, and are promoted in conjunction with other biomedical engineering societies such as AIMBE and 
EMBS. The primary publications associated with the BMES include: Annals of Biomedical Engineering, a monthly 
journal presenting original research in several biomedical ﬁelds; BMES Bulletin, a quarterly newsletter 
presenting a wider array of subject matter relating both to biomedical engineering and BMES news and events; 
and the BMES Membership Directory, an annual publication listing the contact information of the society’s

individual constituents. For more information, contact the BMES directly: BMES, 8401 Corporate Drive, Suite 
225, Landover, MD 20785–2224, USA (http:// www.bmes.org/default.asp; Email: info@bmes.org).

The activities of these biomedical engineering societies are critical to the continued advancement of the 
professional status of biomedical engineers. Therefore, all biomedical engineers, including students in the 
profession, are encouraged to become members of these societies and engage in the activities of true 
professionals.

EXERCISES

1. Select a speciﬁc medical technology from the following list of historical periods. Describe the 
fundamental principles of operation and discuss their impact on health care delivery: (a) 1900–1939; (b) 
1945–1970; (c) 19701980; (d) 1980–2003.

2. Provide a review of the effect computer technology has had on health care delivery, citing the computer 
application and the time frame of its implementation.

3. The term genetic engineering implies an engineering function. Is there one? Should this activity be 
included in the ﬁeld of biomedical engineering?

4. Discuss in some detail the role the genome project has had and is anticipated to have on the development 
of new medical technology.

5. Using your crystal ball, what advances in engineering and/or life science do you think will have the 
greatest effect on clinical care or biomedical research?

6. The organizational structure of a hospital involves three major groups: (1) the board of trustees, (2) 
administrators, and (3) the medical staff. Specify the major responsibilities of each. In what group should 
a department of clinical engineering reside? Explain your answer.

7. Based on its deﬁnition, what attributes should a clinical engineer have?

8. List at least seven (7) speciﬁc activities of clinical engineers.

9. Provide modern examples (i.e., names of individuals and their activities) of the three major roles played 
by biomedical engineers: (a) The problem solver; (b) The technological entrepreneur; (c) The 
engineer–scientist.

10. Do the following groups ﬁt the deﬁnition of a profession? Discuss how they do or do not: (a) 
Registered nurses; (b) Biomedical technicians; (c) Respiratory therapists; (d) Hospital administrators.

11. List the areas of knowledge necessary to practice biomedical engineering.

Identify where in the normal educational process one can acquire knowledge. How best can administrative 
skills be acquired?

12. Provide a copy of the home page for a biomedical engineering professional society and a list of the 
society’s major activities for the coming year.

13. What is your view regarding the role biomedical engineers will play in the health care system of 
tomorrow?

14. Discuss the trade-offs in health care that occur as a result of limited ﬁnancial resources.

15. Discuss whether medical technology is an economic cost factor, beneﬁt, or both.

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READING

Aston, C. (2001). Biological warfare canaries. IEEE Spectrum 38:10, 35–40.

Bankman, I.N. (2000). Handbook of Medical Imaging. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. Bronzino, J.D. (2005). 
Biomedical Engineering Handbook, 2nd Ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton,

FL.

Bronzino, J.D. (1992). Management of Medical Technology: A Primer for Clinical Engineer-

ing. Butterworth, Stoneham, MA.

Carson, E. and Cobelli, C. (2001). Modeling Methodology for Physiology and Medicine.

Academic Press, San Diego, CA.

Laurenchin, C.T. (2003). Repair and restore with tissue engineering. EMBS Magazine 22:5,

16–17.

Nebekar, F. (2002). Golden accomplishments in biomedical engineering. EMBS Magazine

21:3, 17–48.

Pacela, A. (1990). Bioengineering Education Directory. Quest Publishing, Brea, CA. Palsson, B.O. and Bhatia, 
S.N. (2004). Tissue Engineering. Prentice Hall, Englewood, NJ. The EMBS Magazine published by the Institute 
of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, edited

by John Enderle, especially Writing the book on BME, 21:3, 2002.


