3

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Susan Blanchard, PhD

Chapter Contents

3.1 Introduction

3.2 Cellular Organization

3.2.1 Plasma Membrane

3.2.2 Cytoplasm and Organelles

3.2.3 DNA and Gene Expression

3.3 Tissues

3.4 Major Organ Systems

3.4.1 Circulatory System

3.4.2 Respiratory System

3.4.3 Nervous System

3.4.4 Skeletal System

3.4.5 Muscular System

3.5 Homeostasis Exercises Suggested Reading

At the conclusion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:

&

& & &

Deﬁne anatomy and physiology and explain why they are important to biomedical engineering.

Deﬁne important anatomical terms.

Describe the cell theory.

List the major types of organic compounds and other elements found in cells.

&

& & &

&

&

Explain how the plasma membrane maintains the volume and internal concentrations of a cell.

Calculate the internal osmolarity and ionic concentrations of a model cell at equilibrium. List and describe 
the functions of the major organelles found within mammalian cells. Describe the similarities, differences, 
and purposes of replication, transcription, and translation.

List and describe the major components and functions of ﬁve organ systems: Circulatory, respiratory, 
nervous, skeletal, and muscular.

Deﬁne homeostasis and describe how feedback mechanisms help maintain it.

3.1 INTRODUCTION

Since biomedical engineering is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld based in both engineering and the life sciences, 
it is important for biomedical engineers to have knowledge about and be able to communicate in both areas. 
Biomedical engineers must understand the basic components of the body and how they function well enough to 
exchange ideas and information with physicians and life scientists. Two of the most basic terms and areas of 
study in the life sciences are anatomy and physiology. Anatomy refers to the internal and external 
structures of the body and their physical relationships, whereas physiology refers to the study of the 
functions of those structures.

Figure 3.1a shows a male body in anatomical position. In this position, the body is erect and facing forward 
with the arms hanging at the sides and the palms facing outward. This particular view shows the anterior 
(ventral) side of the body, whereas Figure 3.1c illustrates the posterior (dorsal) view of another male body 
that is also in anatomical position and Figure 3.1b presents the lateral view of the female body. In 
clinical practice, directional terms are used to describe the relative positions of various parts of the 
body. Proximal parts are nearer to the trunk of the body or to the attached end of a limb than are distal 
parts (Fig. 3.1a). Parts of the body that are located closer to the head than other parts when the body is 
in anatomical position are said to be superior (Fig. 3.1b), whereas those located closer to the feet than 
other parts are termed inferior. Medial implies that a part is toward the midline of the body, whereas 
lateral means away from the midline (Fig. 3.1c). Parts of the body that lie in the direction of the head are 
said to be in the cranial direction, whereas those parts that lie in the direction of the feet are said to 
be in the caudal direction (Fig. 3.2).

Anatomical locations can also be described in terms of planes. The plane that divides the body into two 
symmetric halves along its midline is called the midsaggital plane (Fig. 3.2). Planes that are parallel to 
the midsaggital plane but do not divide the body into symmetric halves are called sagittal planes. The 
frontal plane is perpendicular to the midsaggital plane and divides the body into asymmetric anterior and 
posterior portions. Planes that cut across the body and are perpendicular to the midsaggital and frontal 
planes are called transverse planes.

Human bodies are divided into two main regions, axial and appendicular. The axial part consists of the head, 
neck, thorax (chest), abdomen, and pelvis whereas the

appendicular part consists of the upper and lower extremities. The upper extremities, or limbs, include the 
shoulders, upper arms, forearms, wrists, and hands whereas the lower extremities include the hips, thighs, 
lower legs, ankles, and feet. The abdominal region can be further divided into nine regions or four 
quadrants.

The cavities of the body hold the internal organs. The major cavities are the dorsal and ventral body 
cavities and the smaller cavities include the nasal, oral, orbital (eye), tympanic (middle ear), and 
synovial (movable joint) cavities. The dorsal body cavity includes the cranial cavity that holds the brain 
and the spinal cavity that contains the spinal cord. The ventral body cavity contains the thoracic and 
abdominopelvic cavities that are separated by the diaphragm. The thoracic cavity contains the lungs and the 
mediastinum, which contains the heart and its attached blood vessels, the trachea, the esophagus, and all 
other organs in this region except for the lungs. The abdominopelvic cavity is divided by an imaginary line 
into the abdominal and pelvic cavities. The former is the largest cavity in the body and holds the stomach, 
small and large intestines, liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, and gall bladder. The latter contains the 
urinary bladder, the rectum, and the internal portions of the reproductive system.

The anatomical terms described previously are used by physicians, life scientists, and biomedical engineers 
when discussing the whole human body or its major parts. Correct use of these terms is vital for biomedical 
engineers to communicate with health care professionals and to understand the medical problem of concern or 
interest. Although it is important to be able to use the general terms that describe

the human body, it is also important for biomedical engineers to have a basic understanding of some of the 
more detailed aspects of human anatomy and physiology.

3.2 CELLULAR ORGANIZATION

Although there are many smaller units such as enzymes and organelles that perform physiological tasks or 
have deﬁnable structures, the smallest anatomical and physiological unit in the human body that can, under 
appropriate conditions, live and reproduce on its own is the cell. Cells were ﬁrst discovered more than 300 
years ago shortly after Antony van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch optician, invented the microscope. With his 
microscope, van Leeuwenhoek was able to observe ‘‘many very small animalcules, the motions of which were 
very pleasing to behold’’ in tartar scrapings from his teeth. Following the efforts of van Leeuwenhoek, 
Robert Hooke, a Curator of Instruments for the Royal Society of England, in the late 1600s further described 
cells when he used one of the earliest microscopes to look at the plant cell walls that remain in cork. 
These observations and others led to the cell theory developed by

Theodor Schwann and Matthias Jakob Schleiden and formalized by Rudolf Virchow in the mid-1800s. The cell 
theory states that: (1) all organisms are composed of one or more cells, (2) the cell is the smallest unit 
of life, and (3) all cells come from previously existing cells. Thus, cells are the basic building blocks of 
life.

Cells are composed mostly of organic compounds and water with more than 60% of the weight in a human body 
coming from water. The organic compoundscarbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids—that cells 
synthesize are the molecules that are fundamental to sustaining life. These molecules function as energy 
packets, storehouses of energy and hereditary information, structural materials, and metabolic workers. The 
most common elements found in humans (in descending order based on percent of body weight) are oxygen, 
carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, calcium, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, chlorine, magnesium, sulfur, iron, and 
iodine. Carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen contribute more than 99% of all the atoms in the body. Most 
of these elements are incorporated into organic compounds, but some exist in other forms, such as phosphate 
groups and ions.

Carbohydrates are used by cells not only as structural materials but also to transport and store energy. 
There are three classes of carbohydrates: monosaccharides (e.g., glucose), oligosaccharides (e.g., lactose, 
sucrose, maltose), and polysaccharides (e.g., glycogen). Lipids are greasy or oily compounds that will 
dissolve in each other but not in water. They form structural materials in cells and are the main reservoirs 
of stored energy. Proteins are the most diverse form of biological molecules. Specialized proteins called 
enzymes make metabolic reactions proceed at a faster rate than would occur if the enzymes were not available 
and enable cells to produce the organic compounds of life. Other proteins provide structural elements in the 
body, act as transport channels across plasma membranes, function as signals for changing activities, and 
provide chemical weapons against disease-carrying bacteria. These diverse proteins are built from a small 
number (20) of essential amino acids.

Nucleotides and nucleic acids make up the last category of important biological molecules. Nucleotides are 
small organic compounds that contain a ﬁve-carbon sugar (ribose or deoxyribose), a phosphate group, and a 
nitrogen-containing base that has a single or double carbon ring structure. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is 
the energy currency of the cell and plays a central role in metabolism. Other nucleotides are subunits of 
coenzymes which are enzyme helpers. The two nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic 
acid (RNA). DNA (Fig. 3.3) is a unique, helical molecule that contains chains of paired nucleotides that run 
in opposite directions. Each nucleotide contains either a pyrimidine base—thymine (T) or cytosine (C)—with a 
single ring structure or a purine base—adenine (A) or guanine (G)with a double ring. In the double helix of 
DNA, thymine always pairs with adenine (T–A) and cytosine always pairs with guanine (C–G). RNA is similar to 
DNA except that it consists of a single helical strand, contains ribose instead of deoxyribose, and has 
uracil (U) instead of thymine.

All cells are surrounded by a plasma membrane that separates, but does not isolate, the cell’s interior from 
its environment. Animal cells, such as those found in humans, are eukaryotic cells. A generalized animal 
cell is shown in Figure 3.4. In addition to the plasma membrane, eukaryotic cells contain membrane-bound 
organelles and a

membrane-bound nucleus. Prokaryotic cells (e.g., bacteria) lack membrane-bound structures other than the 
plasma membrane. In addition to a plasma membrane, all cells have a region that contains DNA (which carries 
the hereditary instructions for the cell) and cytoplasm (which is a semiﬂuid substance that includes 
everything inside the plasma membrane except for the DNA).

3.2.1 Plasma Membrane

The plasma membrane performs several functions for the cell. It gives mechanical strength, provides 
structure, helps with movement, and controls the cell’s volume and its activities by regulating the movement 
of chemicals in and out of the cell. The plasma membrane is composed of two layers of phospholipids 
interspersed with proteins and cholesterol (Fig. 3.5). The proteins in the plasma membranes of mammalian 
cells provide binding sites for hormones, recognition markers for identifying cells as one type or another, 
adhesive mechanisms for binding adjacent cells to each other, and channels for transporting materials across 
the plasma membrane. The phospholipids are arranged with their ‘‘water loving’’ (hydrophilic) heads pointing 
outward and their ‘‘water fearing’’ (hydrophobic) tails pointing inward. This doublelayer arrangement of 
phospholipids interspersed with protein channels helps maintain the internal environment of a cell by 
controlling the substances that move across the membrane, whereas the cholesterol molecules act as 
stabilizers to prevent extensive lateral movement of the lipid molecules.

Some molecules (e.g., oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water) can easily cross the plasma membrane, whereas other 
substances (e.g., large molecules and ions) must move through the protein channels. Osmosis is the process 
by which substances move across a selectively permeable membrane such as a cell’s plasma membrane, whereas 
diffusion refers to the movement of molecules from an area of relatively high concentration to an area of 
relatively low concentration. Substances that can easily cross the plasma membrane achieve diffusion 
equilibrium when there is no net movement of these substances across the membrane (i.e., the concentration 
of the substance inside the cell equals the concentration of the substance outside of the cell). Active 
transport, which requires an input of energy, usually in the form of ATP, can be used to move ions and 
molecules across the plasma membrane and is often used to move them from areas of low concentration to areas 
of high concentration. This mechanism helps maintain concentrations of ions and molecules inside a cell that 
are different from the concentrations outside the cell. A typical mammalian cell has internal sodium ion (Na 
þ )

concentrations of 12 mM (12 moles of Na þ per 1000 liters of solution) and extracellular Na þ concentrations 
of 120 mM, whereas intracellular and extracellular potassium ion (K þ ) concentrations are on the order of 
125 mM and 5 mM, respectively. In addition to positively charged ions (cations), cells also contain 
negatively charged ions (anions). A typical mammalian cell has intracellular and extracellular chloride ion 
(Cl À ) concentrations of 5 mM and 125 mM and internal anion (e.g., proteins, charged amino acids, sulfate 
ions, and phosphate ions) concentrations of 108 mM. These transmembrane ion gradients are used to make ATP, 
to drive various transport processes, and to generate electrical signals.

Example Problem 3.1

How many molecules of sodium and potassium ions would a cell that has a volume of 2 nl contain?

Solution

Assuming that the intracellular concentrations of Na þ and K þ are 12 mM and 125 mM, respectively, the 
number of molecules for each can be determined by using the volume of the cell and Avogadro’s number.

moles

molecules

Na þ : 12

K þ : 125

Â 6:023 Â 1023  1000 liters

Â 2 Â 10 À9 liters ¼ 1:45 Â 10 13 molecules

mole

moles

molecules

Â 6:023 Â 1023  1000 liters

Â 2 Â 10 À9 liters ¼ 1:51 Â 10 14 molecules

mole

&

The plasma membrane plays an important role in regulating cell volume by controlling the internal osmolarity 
of the cell. Osmolarity is deﬁned in terms of concentration of dissolved substances. A 1 osmolar (1 Osm) 
solution contains 1 mole of dissolved particles per liter of solution whereas a 1 milliosmolar (1 mOsm) 
solution has 1 mole of dissolved particles per 1000 liters of solution. Thus, solutions with high osmolarity 
have low concentrations of water or other solvents. For biological purposes, solutions with 0.1 Osm glucose 
and 0.1 Osm urea have essentially the same concentrations of water. It is important to note that a 0.1 M 
solution of sodium chloride (NaCl) will form a 0.2 Osm solution since NaCl dissociates into Na þ and Cl À 
ions and thus has twice as many dissolved particles as a solution of a substance (e.g., glucose) that does 
not dissociate into smaller units. Two solutions are isotonic if they have the same osmolarity. One solution 
is hypotonic to another if it has a lower osmolarity and hypertonic to another if it has a higher 
osmolarity. It is important to note that tonicity (isotonic, hypotonic, or hypertonic) is determined by only 
those molecules that cannot cross the plasma membrane since molecules that can freely cross will eventually 
reach equilibrium with the same concentration inside and outside of the cell.

Consider a simple model cell that consists of a plasma membrane and cytoplasm. The cytoplasm in this model 
cell contains proteins that cannot cross the plasma membrane and water which can. At equilibrium, the total 
osmolarity inside the cell

must equal the total osmolarity outside the cell. If the osmolarity inside and the osmolarity outside of the 
cell are out of balance, there will be a net movement of water from the side of the plasma membrane where it 
is more highly concentrated to the other side until equilibrium is achieved. For example, assume that a 
model cell (Fig. 3.6) contains 0.2 M protein and is placed in a hypotonic solution that contains 0.1 M 
sucrose. The plasma membrane of this model cell is impermeable to proteins and sucrose but freely permeable 
to water. The volume of the cell, 1 nl, is very small relative to the volume of the solution. In other 
words, changes in the cell’s volume have no measurable effect on the volume of the external solution. What 
will happen to the volume of the cell as it achieves equilibrium?

At equilibrium, the osmolarity inside the cell must equal the osmolarity outside the cell. The initial 
osmolarity inside the cell is 0.2 Osm since the proteins do not dissociate into smaller units. The 
osmolarity outside the cell is 0.1 Osm due to the sucrose solution. A 0.2 Osm solution has 0.2 moles of 
dissolved particles per liter of solution whereas a 0.1 Osm solution has half as many moles of dissolved 
particles per liter. The osmolarity inside the cell must decrease by a factor of 2 in order to achieve 
equilibrium. Since the plasma membrane will not allow any of the protein molecules to leave the cell, this 
can only be achieved by doubling the cell’s volume. Thus, there will be a net movement of water across the 
plasma membrane until the cell’s volume increases to 2 nl and the cell’s internal osmolarity is reduced to 
0.1 Osm—the same as the

osmolarity of the external solution. The water moves down its concentration gradient by diffusing from where 
it is more highly concentrated in the 0.1 M sucrose solution to where it is less concentrated in the 0.2 M 
protein solution in the cell.

Example Problem 3.2

What would happen to the model cell in Figure 3.6 if it were placed in pure water?

Solution

Water can pass through the plasma membrane and would ﬂow down its concentration gradient from where it is 
more concentrated (outside of the cell) to where it is less concentrated (inside of the cell). Eventually, 
enough water would move into the cell to rupture the plasma membrane since the concentration of water 
outside of the cell would be higher than the concentration of water inside of the cell as long as there were 
proteins trapped within the cell. &

Example Problem 3.3

Assume that the model cell in Figure 3.6 has an initial volume of 2 nl and contains 0.2 M protein. The cell 
is placed in a large volume of 0.2 M NaCl. In this model, neither Na þ nor Cl À can cross the plasma 
membrane and enter the cell. Is the 0.2 M NaCl solution hypotonic, isotonic, or hypertonic relative to the 
osmolarity inside the cell? Describe what happens to the cell as it achieves equilibrium in this new 
environment. What will be the ﬁnal osmolarity of the cell? What will be its ﬁnal volume?

Solution

The osmolarity inside the cell is 0.2 Osm. The osmolarity of the 0.2 M NaCl solution is 0.4 Osm (0:2 Osm Na 
þ þ 0:2 Osm Cl À ). Thus, the NaCl solution is hypertonic relative to the osmolarity inside the cell 
(osmolarity outside > osmolarity inside ). Since none of the particles (protein, Na þ , and Cl À ) can cross 
the membrane, water will move out of the cell until the osmolarity inside the cell is 0.4 Osm. This will be 
achieved when the volume inside the cell has been reduced from 2 nl to 1 nl.

C1 V1 ¼C2 V2 

0:2 Osm

Â 2 nl ¼ V2  0:4 Osm

1 nl ¼ V2 

&

Real cells are much more complex than the simple model described here. In addition to achieving osmotic 
balance at equilibrium, real cells must also achieve electrical balance with regard to the ions that are 
present in the cytoplasm. The principle of electrical neutrality requires that the overall concentration of 
cations in a biological compartment (e.g., a cell) must equal the overall concentration of anions in that 
compartment. Consider another model cell (Fig. 3.7) with internal and external cation and anion 
concentrations similar to those of a typical mammalian cell. Is the cell at equilibrium if the plasma 
membrane is freely permeable to K þ and Cl À but

impermeable to Na þ and the internal anions? The total osmolarity inside the cell is 250 mOsm (12 mM Na þ , 
125 mM K þ , 5 mM Cl À , 108 mM anions) while the total osmolarity outside the cell is also 250 mOsm (120 mM 
Na þ , 5 mM K þ , 125 mM Cl À ) so the cell is in osmotic balance (i.e., there will be no net movement of 
water across the plasma membrane). If the average charge per molecule of the anions inside the cell is 
considered to be À1:2, then the cell is also approximately in electrical equilibrium (12 þ 125 positive 
charges for Na þ and K þ ; 5 þ 1:2 Â 108 negative charges for ClÀ  and the other anions). Real cells, 
however, cannot maintain this equilibrium without expending energy since real cells are slightly permeable 
to Na þ . In order to maintain equilibrium and keep Na þ from accumulating intracellularly, mammalian cells 
must actively pump Na þ out of the cell against its diffusion and electrical gradients. Since Na þ is pumped 
out through specialized protein channels at a rate equivalent to the rate at which it leaks in through other 
channels, it behaves osmotically as if it cannot cross the plasma membrane. Thus, mammalian cells exist in a 
steady state, rather than at equilibrium, since energy in the form of ATP must be used to prevent a net 
movement of ions across the plasma membrane.

Example Problem 3.4

Consider a simple model cell, such as the one in Figure 3.7, which has the following ion concentrations. Is 
the cell at equilibrium? Explain your answer.

Solution

Yes. The cell is both electrically and osmotically at equilibrium because the charges within the inside and 
outside compartments are equal and the osmolarity inside the cell equals the osmolarity outside of the cell.

Inside

Outside

Positive Negative Osmolarity

158 þ 20 ¼ 178 mM 52 þ 1:2 Â 104 ¼ 177 mM 158 þ 20 þ 52 þ 104 ¼ 334 mM

178 mM pos % 177 mMneg 

4 þ 163 ¼ 167 mM 167 mM 4 þ 163 þ 167 ¼ 334 mM

167 mM pos ¼ 167 mMneg 

334 mM inside ¼ 334 mMoutside 

&

One of the consequences of the distribution of charged particles in the intracellular and extracellular 
ﬂuids is that an electrical potential exists across the plasma membrane. The value of this electrical 
potential depends on the intracellular and extracellular concentrations of ions that can cross the membrane 
and will be described more fully in Chapter 11.

In addition to controlling the cell’s volume, the plasma membrane also provides a route for moving large 
molecules and other materials into and out of the cell. Substances can be moved into the cell by means of 
endocytosis (Fig. 3.8a) and out of the cell by means of exocytosis (Fig. 3.8b). In endocytosis, material 
(e.g., a bacterium) outside of the cell is engulfed by a portion of the plasma membrane that encircles it to 
form a vesicle. The vesicle then pinches off from the plasma membrane and moves its contents to the inside 
of the cell. In exocytosis, material within the cell is surrounded by a membrane to form a vesicle. The 
vesicle then moves to the edge of the cell where its membrane fuses with the plasma membrane and its 
contents are released to the exterior of the cell.

3.2.2 Cytoplasm and Organelles

The cytoplasm contains ﬂuid (cytosol) and organelles. Ions (such as Na þ , K þ , and Cl À ) and molecules 
(such as glucose) are distributed through the cytosol via diffusion. Membrane-bound organelles include the 
nucleus, rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, and mitochondria. 
Nonmembranous organelles include nucleoli, ribosomes, centrioles, microvilli, cilia, ﬂagella, and the 
microtubules, intermediate ﬁlaments, and microﬁlaments of the cytoskeleton.

The nucleus (Fig. 3.4) consists of the nuclear envelope (a double membrane) and the nucleoplasm (a ﬂuid 
that contains ions, enzymes, nucleotides, proteins, DNA, and small amounts of RNA). Within its DNA, the 
nucleus contains the instructions for life’s processes. Nuclear pores are protein channels that act as 
connections for ions and RNA, but not proteins or DNA, to leave the nucleus and enter the cytoplasm and for 
some proteins to enter the nucleoplasm. Most nuclei contain one or more nucleoli.

Each nucleolus contains DNA, RNA, and proteins and synthesizes the components of the ribosomes that cells 
use to make proteins.

The smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus, and assorted vesicles (Figs. 3.4, 3.9a, 
and 3.9b) make up the cytomembrane system which delivers proteins and lipids for manufacturing membranes and 
accumulates and stores proteins and lipids for speciﬁc uses. The ER also acts as a storage site for calcium 
ions. The rough ER differs from the smooth ER in that it has ribosomes attached to its exterior surface. 
Ribosomes provide the platforms for synthesizing proteins. Those that are synthesized on the rough ER are 
passed into its interior where nonproteinaceous side chains are attached to them. These modiﬁed proteins 
move to the smooth ER where they are packaged in vesicles. The smooth ER also manufactures and packages 
lipids into vesicles and is responsible for releasing stored calcium ions. The vesicles leave the smooth ER 
and become attached to the Golgi apparatus where their contents are released, modiﬁed, and repackaged into 
new vesicles. Some of these vesicles, called lysosomes, contain digestive enzymes which are used to break 
down materials that move into the cells via endocytosis. Other vesicles contain proteins such as hormones 
and neurotransmitters that are secreted from the cells by means of exocytosis.

The mitochondria (Figs. 3.9c and 3.10) contain two membranes: an outer membrane that surrounds the organelle 
and an inner membrane that divides the organelle’s interior into two compartments. Approximately 95% of the 
ATP required by the cell is produced in the mitochondria in a series of oxygen-requiring reactions which 
produce carbon dioxide as a byproduct. Mitochondria are different from most other organelles in that they 
contain their own DNA. The majority of the mitochondria in sexually reproducing organisms, such as humans, 
come from the mother’s egg cell because the father’s sperm contributes little more than the DNA in a haploid 
(half) set of chromosomes to the developing offspring.

Microtubules, intermediate ﬁlaments, and microﬁlaments provide structural support and assist with 
movement. Microtubules are long, hollow, cylindrical structures that radiate from microtubule organizing 
centers and, during cell division, from centrosomes, a specialized region of the cytoplasm that is located 
near the nucleus

and contains two centrioles (Figs. 3.4 and 3.11a) oriented at right angles to each other. Microtubules 
consist of spiraling subunits of a protein called tubulin, whereas centrioles consist of nine triplet 
microtubules that radiate from their centers like the spokes of a wheel. Intermediate ﬁlaments are hollow 
and provide structure to the plasma membrane and nuclear envelope. They also aid in cell-to-cell junctions 
and in maintaining the spatial organization of organelles. Myoﬁlaments are found in most cells and are 
composed of strings of protein molecules. Cell movement can occur when actin and myosin, protein subunits of 
myoﬁlaments, interact. Microvilli (Fig. 3.11b) are extensions of the plasma membrane that contain 
microﬁlaments. They increase the surface area of a cell to facilitate absorption of extracellular 
materials.

Cilia (Fig. 3.11c) and ﬂagella are parts of the cytoskeleton that have shafts composed of nine pairs of 
outer microtubules and two single microtubules in the center. Both types of shafts are anchored by a basal 
body which has the same structure as a centriole. Flagella function as whiplike tails that propel cells such 
as sperm. Cilia are generally shorter and more profuse than ﬂagella and can be found on specialized cells 
such as those that line the respiratory tract. The beating of the cilia helps move mucustrapped bacteria and 
particles out of the lungs.

3.2.3 DNA and Gene Expression

DNA (Fig. 3.3) is found in the nucleus and mitochondria of eukaryotic cells. In organisms that reproduce 
sexually, the DNA in the nucleus contains information from both parents whereas that in the mitochondria 
comes from the organism’s mother. In the nucleus, the DNA is wrapped around protein spools, called 
nucleosomes, and is organized into pairs of chromosomes. Humans have 22 pairs of autosomal chromosomes and 
two sex chromosomes, XX for females and XY for males (Fig. 3.12). If the DNA from all 46 chromosomes in a 
human somatic cell (i.e., any cell

that does not become an egg or sperm cell) was stretched out end to end, it would be about 2 nm wide and 2 m 
long. Each chromosome contains thousands of individual genes that are the units of information about 
heritable traits. Each gene has a particular location in a speciﬁc chromosome and contains the code for 
producing one of the three forms of RNA (ribosomal RNA, messenger RNA, and transfer RNA). The Human Genome 
Project was begun in 1990 and had as its goal to ﬁrst identify the location of at least 3000 speciﬁc human 
genes and then to determine the sequence of nucleotides (about 3 billion!) in a complete set of haploid 
human chromosomes (one chromosome from each of the 23 pairs). See Chapter 13 for more information about the 
Human Genome Project.

DNA replication occurs during cell division (Fig. 3.13). During this semiconservative process, enzymes unzip 
the double helix, deliver complementary bases to the nucleotides, and bind the delivered nucleotides into 
the developing complementary strands. Following replication, each strand of DNA is duplicated so that two 
double helices now exist, each consisting of one strand of the original DNA and one new strand. In this way, 
each daughter cell gets the same hereditary information that was contained in the original dividing cell. 
During replication, some enzymes check for accuracy while others repair pairing mistakes so that the error 
rate is reduced to approximately one per billion.

Since DNA remains in the nucleus where it is protected from the action of the cell’s enzymes and proteins 
are made on ribosomes outside of the nucleus, a method (transcription) exists for transferring information 
from the DNA to the cytoplasm. During transcription (Fig. 3.14), the sequence of nucleotides in a gene that 
codes for a protein is transferred to messenger RNA (mRNA) through complementary base pairing of the 
nucleotide sequence in the gene. For example, a DNA sequence of TACGCTCCGATA would become AUGCGAGGCUAU in 
the mRNA. The process is somewhat more complicated since the transcript produced directly from the DNA 
contains sequences of nucleotides, called introns, that are removed before the ﬁnal mRNA is produced. The 
mRNA also has a tail, called a poly-A tail, of about 100–200 adenine nucleotides attached to one end. A cap 
with a nucleotide that has a methyl group and phosphate groups bonded to it is attached at the other end of 
the mRNA. Transcription differs from replication in that (1) only a certain stretch of DNA acts as

the template and not the whole strand, (2) different enzymes are used, and (3) only a single strand is 
produced.

After being transcribed, the mRNA moves out into the cytoplasm through the nuclear pores and binds to 
speciﬁc sites on the surface of the two subunits that make up a ribosome (Fig. 3.15). In addition to the 
ribosomes, the cytoplasm contains amino acids and another form of RNA, transfer RNA (tRNA). Each tRNA 
contains a triplet of bases, called an anticodon, and binds at an area away from the triplet to an amino 
acid that is speciﬁc for that particular anticodon. The mRNA that was produced from the gene in the nucleus 
also contains bases in sets of three. Each triplet in mRNA is called a codon. The four possibilities for 
nucleotides (A, U, C, G) in each of the three

places give rise to 64 (4 3 ) possible codons. These 64 codons make up the genetic code. Each codon codes 
for a speciﬁc amino acid, but some amino acids are speciﬁed by more than one codon (see Table 3.1). For 
example, AUG is the only mRNA codon for methionine (the amino acid that always signals the starting place 
for translation—the process by which the information from a gene is used to produce a protein) whereas UUA, 
UUG, CUU, CUC, CUA, and CUG are all codons for leucine. The anticodon on the tRNA that delivers the 
methionine to the ribosome is UAC, whereas tRNAs with anticodons of AAU, AAC, GAA, GAG, GAU, and GAC deliver 
leucine.

During translation, the mRNA binds to a ribosome and tRNA delivers amino acids to the growing polypeptide 
chain in accordance with the codons speciﬁed by the mRNA. Peptide bonds are formed between each newly 
delivered amino acid and the previously delivered one. When the amino acid is bound to the growing chain, it 
is released from the tRNA, and the tRNA moves off into the cytoplasm where it joins with another amino acid 
that is speciﬁed by its anticodon. This process continues until a stop codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is reached 
on the mRNA.

The protein is then released into the cytoplasm or into the rough ER for further modiﬁcations.

Example Problem 3.5

Consider a protein that contains the amino acids asparagine, phenylalanine, histidine, and serine in 
sequence. Which nucleotide sequences on DNA (assuming that there were no introns) would result in this 
series of amino acids? What would be the anticodons for the tRNAs that delivered these amino acids to the 
ribosomes during translation?

Solution

The genetic code (Table 3.1) provides the sequence for the mRNA codons that specify these amino acids. The 
mRNA codons can be used to determine the sequence in the original DNA and the anticodons of the tRNA since 
the mRNA bases must pair with the bases in both DNA and tRNA. Note that DNA contains thymine (T) but no 
uracil (U) and that both mRNA and tRNA contain U and not T. See Figs. 3.3 and 3.14 for examples of base 
pairing.

3.3 TISSUES

Groups of cells and surrounding substances that function together to perform one or more specialized 
activities are called tissues (Fig. 3.16). There are four primary types of tissue in the human body: 
epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous. Epithelial tissues are either composed of cells arranged in 
sheets that are one or more layers thick or are organized into glands that are adapted for secretion. They 
are also characterized by having a free surface (e.g., the inside surface of the intestines or the outside 
of the skin) and a basilar membrane. Typical functions of epithelial tissue include absorption (lining of 
the small intestine), secretion (glands), transport (kidney

tubules), excretion (sweat glands), protection (skin, Fig. 3.16a), and sensory reception (taste buds). 
Connective tissues are the most abundant and widely distributed. Connective tissue proper can be loose 
(loosely woven ﬁbers found around and between organs), irregularly dense (protective capsules around 
organs), and regularly dense (ligaments and tendons), whereas specialized connective tissue includes blood 
(Fig. 3.16b), bone, cartilage, and adipose tissue. Muscle tissue provides movement for the body through its 
specialized cells that can shorten in response to stimulation and then return to their uncontracted state. 
Figure 3.16c shows the three types of muscle tissue: skeletal (attached to bones), smooth (found in the 
walls of blood vessels), and cardiac (found only in the heart). Nervous tissue consists of neurons (Fig. 
3.16d) that conduct electrical impulses and glial cells that protect, support, and nourish neurons.

3.4 MAJOR ORGAN SYSTEMS

CHAPTER 3

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Combinations of tissues that perform complex tasks are called organs, and organs that function together form 
organ systems. The human body has 11 major organ systems: integumentary, endocrine, lymphatic, digestive, 
urinary, reproductive, circulatory, respiratory, nervous, skeletal, and muscular. The integumentary system 
(skin, hair, nails, and various glands) provides protection for the body. The endocrine system (ductless 
glands such as the thyroid and adrenals) secretes hormones that regulate many chemical actions within cells. 
The lymphatic system (glands, lymph nodes, lymph, lymphatic vessels) returns excess ﬂuid and protein to the 
blood and helps defend the body against infection and tissue damage. The digestive system (stomach, 
intestines, and other structures) ingests food and water, breaks food down into small molecules that can be 
absorbed and used by cells, and removes solid wastes. The urinary system (kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, 
and urethra) maintains the ﬂuid volume of the body, eliminates metabolic wastes, and helps regulate blood 
pressure and acid–base and water–salt balances. The reproductive system (ovaries, testes, reproductive 
cells, and accessory glands and ducts) produces eggs or sperm and provides a mechanism for the production 
and nourishment of offspring. The circulatory system (heart, blood, and blood vessels) serves as a 
distribution system for the body. The respiratory system (airways and lungs) delivers oxygen to the blood 
from the air and carries away carbon dioxide. The nervous system (brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, and 
sensory organs) regulates most of the body’s activities by detecting and responding to internal and external 
stimuli. The skeletal system (bones and cartilage) provides protection and support as well as sites for 
muscle attachments, the production of blood cells, and calcium and phosphorus storage. The muscular system 
(skeletal muscle) moves the body and its internal parts, maintains posture, and produces heat. Although 
biomedical engineers have made major contributions to understanding, maintaining, and/or replacing 
components in each of the eleven major organ systems, only the last ﬁve in the preceding list will be 
examined in greater detail.

3.4.1 Circulatory System

The circulatory system (Fig. 3.17) delivers nutrients and hormones throughout the body, removes waste 
products from tissues, and provides a mechanism for regulating temperature and removing the heat generated 
by the metabolic activities of the body’s internal organs. Every living cell in the body is no more than 
10–100 mm from a capillary (small blood vessels with walls only one cell thick that are 8 mm in diameter, 
approximately the same size as a red blood cell). This close proximity allows oxygen, carbon dioxide, and 
most other small solutes to diffuse from the cells into the capillary or from the capillary into the cells 
with the direction of diffusion determined by concentration and partial pressure gradients.

The heart (Fig. 3.18), the pumping station that moves blood through the blood vessels, consists of two 
pumps—the right side and the left side. Each side has one

chamber (the atrium) that receives blood and another chamber (the ventricle) that pumps the blood away from 
the heart. The right side moves deoxygenated blood that is loaded with carbon dioxide from the body to the 
lungs, and the left side receives oxygenated blood that has had most of its carbon dioxide removed from the 
lungs and pumps it to the body. The vessels that lead to and from the lungs make up the pulmonary 
circulation, and those that lead to and from the rest of the tissues in the body make up the systemic 
circulation (Fig. 3.19). Blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart are called arteries and those 
that carry blood toward the heart are called veins. The pulmonary artery is the only artery that carries 
deoxygenated blood, and the pulmonary vein is the only vein that carries oxygenated blood. The average adult 
has about 5 L of blood with 80–90% in the systemic circulation at any one time; 75% of the blood is in the 
systemic circulation in the veins, 20% in the arteries, and 5% in the capillaries. Cardiac output is the 
product of the heart rate and the volume of blood pumped from the heart with each beat (i.e., the stroke 
volume). Each time the heart beats, about 80 ml of blood leave the heart. Thus, it takes about 60 beats for 
the average red blood cell to make one complete cycle of the body.

In the normal heart, the cardiac cycle, which refers to the repeating pattern of contraction (systole) and 
relaxation (diastole) of the chambers of the heart, begins with a self-generating electrical pulse in the 
pacemaker cells of the sinoatrial node

(Fig. 3.20). This rapid electrical change in the cells is the result of the movement of ions across their 
plasma membranes. The permeability of the plasma membrane to Na þ changes dramatically and allows these ions 
to rush into the cell. This change in the electrical potential across the plasma membrane from one in which 
the interior of the cell is more negative than the extracellular ﬂuid (approximately À90 mV) to one in 
which the interior of the cell is more positive than the extracellular ﬂuid (approximately 20 mV) is called 
depolarization. After a very short period of time (<0.3 s), changes in the membrane and activation of the 
sodium–potassium pumps result in repolarization, the restoration of the original ionic balance in the cells. 
The entire electrical event in which the polarity of the potential across the plasma membrane rapidly 
reverses and then becomes reestablished is called an action potential. The cells in the sinoatrial node 
depolarize on the average of every 0.83 s in a typical adult at rest. This gives a resting heart rate of 72 
beats per minute with about 8 5 of each beat spent in diastole and 8 3 in systole.

Cardiac cells are linked and tightly coupled so that action potentials spread from one cell to the next. 
Activation wavefronts move across the atria at a rate of about 1 m/s. When cardiac cells depolarize, they 
also contract. The contraction process in the atria (atrial systole) moves blood from the right atrium to 
the right ventricle and from the left atrium to the left ventricle (Fig. 3.21). The activation wavefront 
then moves to the atrioventricular (AV) node where it slows to a rate of about 0.05 m/s to allow time for 
the ventricles to completely ﬁll with the blood from the atria. After leaving the AV node, the activation 
wavefront moves to specialized conduction tissue, the Purkinje system, which spreads the wavefront very 
rapidly (at about 3 m/s) to many cells in both venricles. The activation wavefront spreads through 
ventricular tissue at about

0.5 m/s. This results in the simultaneous contraction of both ventricles (ventricular systole) so that blood 
is forced from the heart into the pulmonary artery from the right ventricle and into the aorta from the left 
ventricle.

The electrocardiogram (ECG; Fig. 3.22) is an electrical measure of the sum of these ionic changes within the 
heart. The P wave represents the depolarization of the atria and the QRS represents the depolarization of 
the ventricles. Ventricular repolarization shows up as the T wave and atrial repolarization is masked by 
ventricular depolarization. Changes in the amplitude and duration of the different parts of the

ECG provide diagnostic information for physicians. Many biomedical engineers have worked on methods for 
recording and analyzing ECGs.

Example Problem 3.6

What would be the heart rate given by an ECG in which 10 R-waves occurred in 6.4 s?

Solution

A sequence of 10 R-waves represents 9 R–R intervals (see Fig. 3.22) or beats of the heart.



9 beats

6:4 s



60 s

1 min



¼ 84 bpm

&

Example Problem 3.7

What would be the cardiac output of the heart in Example Problem 3.6 if the stroke volume were 75 ml?

Solution

The cardiac output (given in liters per minute) is the product of the heart rate and the stroke volume.

beats ml ml liters Â CO ¼ 84 75 ¼ 6300 ¼ 6:3 min beat min min

&

During atrial and ventricular systole, special one-way valves (Fig. 3.23a) keep the blood moving in the 
correct direction. When the atria contract, the atrioventricular valves (tricuspid and mitral) open to allow 
blood to pass into the ventricles. During ventricular systole, the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary) 
open to allow blood to leave the heart while the atrioventricular valves close and prevent blood from 
ﬂowing backwards from the ventricles to the atria. The aortic and pulmonary valves prevent blood from 
ﬂowing back from the pulmonary artery and aorta into the right and left ventricles, respectively. If a 
valve becomes calciﬁed or diseased or is not properly formed during embryonic development, it can be 
replaced by an artiﬁcial valve (Fig. 3.23b), a device that has been developed by cooperative work between 
biomedical engineers and physicians.

Blood pressure can be measured directly or indirectly (noninvasively). Direct blood pressure measurements 
are made by introducing a catheter or needle that is coupled to a pressure transducer into a vein or artery. 
Indirect methods include sphygmomanometry, in which a cuff is used to apply sufﬁcient pressure to an 
artery, usually in the arm, to prevent the ﬂow of blood through the artery, and a stethoscope is used to 
listen to the change in sounds as the cuff is slowly deﬂated. The ﬁrst Korotkoff sounds occur when the 
systolic pressure, the highest pressure reached when the ventricles contract and eject blood, ﬁrst exceeds 
the pressure in the cuff so that blood once again ﬂows through the artery beneath the stethoscope. The 
Korotkoff sounds become mufﬂed and disappear when the pressure in the cuff drops below the diastolic

pressure, the minimum pressure that occurs at the end of ventricular relaxation. Another indirect 
measurement is the oscillometric method, which uses a microprocessor to periodically inﬂate and slowly 
deﬂate a cuff. When blood breaks through the occlusion caused by the cuff, the walls of the artery begin to 
vibrate slightly due to the turbulent nature of the blood ﬂow. The onset of these oscillations in pressure 
correlates with the systolic pressure. The oscillations decrease in amplitude over time with the diastolic 
pressure event corresponding to the point at which the rate of amplitude decrease suddenly changes slope. A 
third indirect measurement, the ultrasonic method, depends on the Doppler shift of sound waves that hit red 
blood cells that are ﬂowing with the blood.

Blood in the systemic circulation leaves the heart through the aorta with an average 
internalpressureofabout100 mmHg(maximumsystolicpressureofabout120 mmHg with a diastolic pressure of about 80 
mm Hg in a normal adult) and moves to medium-sized arteries (Fig. 3.17a) and arterioles. Arterioles lead to 
capillaries (average internal pressure of about 30 mm Hg), which are followed by venules. Venules lead to 
medium-sized veins, then to large veins, and ﬁnally to the venae cavae (average internal pressure of about 
10 mm Hg) which return blood to the heart at the right atrium. Blood in the pulmonary circulation (Fig. 
3.19) leaves the pulmonary artery and moves to arterioles and then the capillary beds within the lungs. It 
returns to the heart through the left atrium. Blood ﬂow is highest in the large arteries and veins (3040 
cm/s in the aorta; 5 cm/s in the venae cavae) and slowest in the capillary beds (1 mm/s) where the exchange 
of nutrients, metabolic wastes, gases, and hormones takes place. Pressures in the pulmonary circulation are 
lower (25 mm Hg/10 mm Hg) than in the systemic circulation due to the decreased pumping power of the smaller 
right ventricle as compared to the left and to the lower resistance of blood vessels in the lungs.

Example Problem 3.8

What would be the pulse pressure and the mean arterial pressure for a person with a blood pressure reading 
of 118 mm Hg/79 mm Hg?

Solution

The pulse pressure is deﬁned as the difference between the systolic (118 mm Hg) and disastolic (79 mm Hg) 
pressures, which would be 39 mm Hg in this case.

Mean arterial pressure is the average blood pressure in the arteries and is estimated as the diastolic 
pressure plus one-third of the pulse pressure, which would be 92 mm Hg in this example. &

3.4.2 Respiratory System

The respiratory system (Fig. 3.24a) moves air to and from the gas exchange surfaces in the body where 
diffusion can occur between air and the circulating blood. It includes the conduction zone and the 
respiratory zone. In the conduction zone (mouth, nose, sinuses, pharynx, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles), 
the air that enters the body is warmed, humidiﬁed, ﬁltered, and cleaned. Mucus is secreted by cells in the 
conduction zone and traps small particles (> 6 mm) before they can reach the respiratory zone. Epithelial 
cells that line the trachea and bronchi have cilia that beat in a coordinated fashion to move mucus toward 
the pharynx where it can be swallowed or expectorated. The respiratory zone, consisting of respiratory 
bronchioles with outpouchings of alveoli and terminal clusters of alveolar sacs, is where gas exchange

between air and blood occurs (Fig. 3.24b). The respiratory zone comprises most of the mass of the lungs.

Certain physical properties—compliance, elasticity, and surface tension—are characteristic of lungs. 
Compliance refers to the ease with which lungs can expand under pressure. A normal lung is about 100 times 
more distensible than a toy balloon. Elasticity refers to the ease with which the lungs and other thoracic 
structures return to their initial sizes after being distended. This aids in pushing air out of the lungs 
during expiration. Surface tension is exerted by the thin ﬁlm of ﬂuid in the alveoli and acts to resist 
distention. It creates a force that is directed inward and creates pressure in the alveolus which is 
directly proportional to the surface tension and inversely proportional to the radius of the alveolus (Law 
of Laplace). Thus, the pressure inside an alveolus with a small radius would be higher than the pressure 
inside an adjacent alveolus with a larger radius and would result in air ﬂowing from the smaller alveolus 
into the larger one. This could cause the smaller alveolus to collapse. This does not happen in normal lungs 
because the ﬂuid inside the alveoli contains a phospholipid that acts as a surfactant. The surfactant 
lowers the surface tension in the alveoli and allows them to get smaller during expiration without 
collapsing. Premature babies often suffer from respiratory distress syndrome because their lungs lack 
sufﬁcient surfactant to prevent their alveoli from collapsing. These babies can be kept alive with 
mechanical ventilators or surfactant sprays until their lungs mature enough to produce surfactant.

Breathing, or ventilation, is the mechanical process by which air is moved into (inspiration) and out of 
(expiration) the lungs. A normal adult takes about 15 to 20 breaths per minute. During inspiration, the 
inspiratory muscles contract and enlarge the thoracic cavity, the portion of the body where the lungs are 
located. This causes the alveoli to enlarge and the alveolar gas to expand. As the alveolar gas expands, the 
partial pressure within the respiratory system drops below atmospheric pressure by about 3 mm Hg so that air 
easily ﬂows in (Boyle’s Law). During expiration, the inspiratory muscles relax and return the thoracic 
cavity to its original volume. Since the volume of the gas inside the respiratory system has decreased, its 
pressure increases to a value that is about 3 mm Hg above atmospheric pressure. Air now moves out of the 
lungs and into the atmosphere.

Lung mechanics refers to the study of the mechanical properties of the lung and chest wall, whereas lung 
statics refers to the mechanical properties of a lung in which the volume is held constant over time. 
Understanding lung mechanics requires knowledge about the volumes within the lungs. Lung capacities contain 
two or more volumes. The tidal volume (TV) is the amount of air that moves in and out of the lungs during 
normal breathing (Fig. 3.25). The total lung capacity (TLC) is the amount of gas contained within the lungs 
at the end of a maximum inspiration. The vital capacity (VC) is the maximum amount of air that can be 
exhaled from the lungs after inspiration to TLC. The residual volume (RV) is the amount of gas remaining in 
the lungs after maximum exhalation. The amount of gas that can be inhaled after inhaling during tidal 
breathing is called the inspiratory reserve volume (IRV). The amount of gas that can be expelled by a 
maximal exhalation after exhaling during tidal breathing is called the expiratory reserve volume (ERV). The 
inspiratory capacity (IC) is the

maximum amount of gas that can be inspired after a normal exhalation during tidal breathing, and the 
functional residual capacity (FRC) is the amount of gas that remains in the lungs at this time.

Allofthevolumesandcapacitiesexcept thosethatinclude theresidual volume canbe measured with a spirometer. The 
classic spirometer is an air-ﬁlled container that is constructed from two drums of different sizes. One 
drum contains water and the other air-ﬁlled drum is inverted over an air-ﬁlled tube and ﬂoats in the 
water. The tube is connectedtoamouthpieceusedbythepatient.Whenthepatientinhales,thelevelofthe 
ﬂoatingdrumdrops.Whenthepatientexhales,theleveloftheﬂoatingdrumrises.These changes in ﬂoating drum 
position can be recorded and used to measure lung volumes.

Example Problem 3.9

The total lung capacity of a patient is 5.9 liters. If the patient’s inspiratory capacity was found to be 
3.3 liters using spirometry, what would be the patient’s functional residual capacity? What would you need 
to measure to determine the patient’s residual volume?

Solution

From Figure 3.25, total lung capacity (TLC) is equal to the sum of inspiratory capacity (IC) and functional 
residual capacity (FRC).

TLC ¼ IC þ FRC

5:9 liters ¼ 3:3 liters þ FRC

FRC ¼ 2:6 liters

TLC, which cannot be determined by means of spirometry, and vital capacity (VC), which can be measured using 
spirometry, must be known to determine residual volume (RV) since

TLC À VC ¼ RV

&

Because spirograms record changes in volume over time, ﬂow rates can be determined for different maneuvers. 
For example, if a patient exhales as forcefully as possible to residual volume following inspiration to TLC, 
then the forced expiratory volume (FEV 1:0 ) is the total volume exhaled at the end of 1 s. The FEV 1:0 is 
normally about 80% of the vital capacity. Restrictive diseases, in which inspiration is limited by reduced 
compliance of the lung or chest wall or by weakness of the inspiratory muscles, result in reduced values for 
FEV 1:0 and vital capacity but their ratio remains about the same. In obstructive diseases, such as asthma, 
the FEV 1:0 is reduced much more than the vital capacity. In these diseases, the TLC is abnormally large but 
expiration ends prematurely. Another useful measurement is the forced expiratory ﬂow rate (FEF25À À 75 % ), 
which is the average ﬂow rate measured over the middle half of the expiration (i.e., from 25 to 75% of the 
vital capacity). Flow-volume loops provide another method for analyzing lung function by relating the rate 
of inspiration and expiration to the volume of air that is moved during each process.

The TLC can be measured using the gas dilution technique. In this method, patients inspire to TLC from a gas 
mixture containing a known amount of an inert tracer gas such as helium, and hold their breaths for 10 s. 
During this time, the inert gas becomes evenly distributed throughout the lungs and airways. Due to 
conservation of mass, the product of initial tracer gas concentration (which is known) times the amount 
inhaled (which is measured) equals the product of ﬁnal tracer gas concentration (which is measured during 
expiration) times the TLC. Body plethysmography, which provides the most accurate method for measuring lung 
volumes, uses an airtight chamber in which the patient sits and breathes through a mouthpiece. This method 
makes use of Boyle’s Law, which states that the product of pressure and volume for gas in a chamber is 
constant under isothermal conditions. Changes in lung volume and pressure at the mouth when the patient 
pants against a closed shutter can be used to calculate the functional residual capacity. Since the 
expiratory reserve volume can be measured, the residual volume can be calculated by subtracting it from the 
functional residual capacity.

Example Problem 3.10

A patient is allowed to breathe a mixture from a 2-liter reservoir that contains 10% of an inert gas (i.e., 
one that will not cross from the lungs into the circulatory system). At the end of a period that is 
sufﬁcient for the contents of the reservoir and the lungs to equilibrate, the concentration of the inert 
gas is measured and is found to be 2.7%. What is the patient’s total lung capacity?

Solution

The total amount of inert gas is the same at the beginning and end of the measurement, but its concentration 
has changed from 10% (C 1 ) to 2.7% (C 2 ). At the beginning, it is conﬁned to a 2-liter reservoir (V 1 ). 
At the end, it is in both the reservoir and the patient’s lungs (V 2 ¼ V 1 þ TLC).

C1 V1 ¼C2 V2 

(0:1) (2 liters) ¼ (0:027) (2 liters þ TLC)

0:2 liters À 0:054 liters ¼ 0:027 TLC

5:4 liters ¼ TLC

&

External respiration occurs in the lungs when gases are exchanged between the blood and the alveoli (Fig. 
3.26). Each adult lung contains about 3:5 Â 10 8 alveoli, which results in a large surface area (60 – 70 m 2 
) for gas exchange to occur. Each alveolus is only one cell layer thick, making the air–blood barrier only 
two cells thick (an alveolar cell and a capillary endothelial cell) which is about 2 mm. The partial 
pressure of oxygen in the alveoli is higher than the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood so oxygen moves 
from the alveoli into the blood. The partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the alveoli is lower than the 
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood so carbon dioxide moves from the blood into the alveoli. 
During internal respiration, carbon dioxide and oxygen move between the blood and the extracellular ﬂuid 
surrounding the body’s cells. The direction and rate of movement of a gas depend

on the partial pressures of the gas in the blood and the extracellular ﬂuid, the surface area available for 
diffusion, the thickness of the membrane that the gas must pass through, and a diffusion constant that is 
related to the solubility and molecular weight of the gas (Fick’s Law).

Mechanical ventilators can be used to deliver air or oxygen to a patient. They can be electrically or 
pneumatically powered and can be controlled by microprocessors. Negative pressure ventilators such as iron 
lungs surround the thoracic cavity and force air into the lungs by creating a negative pressure around the 
chest. This type of ventilator greatly limits access to the patient. Positive pressure ventilators apply 
high-pressure gas at the entrance to the patient’s lungs so that air or oxygen ﬂows down a pressure 
gradient and into the patient. These ventilators can be operated in control mode to breathe for the patient 
at all times or in assist mode to help with ventilation when the patient initiates the breathing cycle. This 
type of ventilation changes the pressure within the thoracic cavity to positive during inspiration, which 
affects venous return to the heart and cardiac output (the amount of blood the heart moves with each beat). 
High frequency jet ventilators deliver very rapid (60–900 breaths per minute) low-volume bursts of air to 
the lungs. Oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged by molecular diffusion rather than by the mass movement 
of air. This method causes less interference with cardiac output than does positive pressure ventilation. 
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) uses the technology that was developed for cardiopulmonary bypass 
machines. Blood is removed from the patient and passed through an artiﬁcial lung where oxygen and carbon 
dioxide are exchanged. It is warmed to body temperature before being returned to the patient. This technique 
allows the patient’s lungs to rest and heal themselves and has been used successfully on some cold-water 
drowning victims and on infants with reversible pulmonary disease.

3.4.3 Nervous System

The nervous system, which is responsible for the integration and control of all the body’s functions, has 
two major divisions: the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system (Fig. 3.27). The former 
consists of all nervous tissue enclosed by bone (e.g., the brain and spinal cord), whereas the latter 
consists of all nervous tissue not enclosed by bone, which enables the body to detect and respond to both 
internal and external stimuli. The peripheral nervous system consists of the 12 pairs of cranial and 31 
pairs of spinal nerves with afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor) neurons.

The nervous system has also been divided into the somatic and autonomic nervous systems. Each of these 
systems consists of components from both the central and peripheral nervous systems. For example, the 
somatic peripheral nervous system consists of the sensory neurons, which convey information from receptors 
for pain, temperature, and mechanical stimuli in the skin, muscles, and joints to the central nervous 
system, and the motor neurons, which return impulses from the central nervous system to these same areas of 
the body. The autonomic nervous system is concerned with the involuntary regulation of smooth muscle, 
cardiac muscle, and glands and consists of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions.

The sympathetic division causes blood vessels in the viscera and skin to constrict, vessels in the skeletal 
muscles to dilate, and heart rate to increase, whereas the parasympathetic division has the opposite effect 
on the vessels in the viscera and skin, provides no innervation to the skeletal muscles, and causes heart 
rate to decrease. Thus, the sympathetic division prepares the body for ‘‘ﬁght or ﬂight’’ and the 
parasympathetic division returns the body to normal operating conditions.

Specialized cells that conduct electrical impulses (neurons) or protect, support, and nourish neurons (glial 
cells) make up the different parts of the nervous system. The cell body of the neuron (Fig. 3.16d) gives 
rise to and nourishes a single axon and multiple, branching dendrites. The dendrites are the main receptor 
portion of the neuron although the cell body can also receive inputs from other neurons. Dendrites usually 
receive signals from thousands of contact points (synapses) with other neurons. The axon extends a few 
millimeters (in the brain) to a meter (from the spinal cord to the foot) and carries nerve signals to other 
nerve cells in the brain or spinal cord or to glands and muscles in the periphery of the body. Some axons 
are surrounded by sheaths of myelin that are formed by specialized, nonneural cells called Schwann cells. 
Each axon has many branches, called presynaptic terminals, at its end. These knoblike protrusions contain 
synaptic vesicles that hold neurotransmitters. When the neuron is stimulated by receiving a signal at its 
dendrites, the permeability of the cell’s plasma membrane to sodium increases, as occurs in cardiac cells, 
and an

action potential moves from the dendrite to the cell body and then on to the axon. Gaps, called nodes of 
Ranvier, in the myelin sheaths of some axons allow the action potential to move more rapidly by essentially 
jumping from one node to the next. The vesicles in the presynaptic terminals release their neurotransmitter 
into the space between the axon and an adjacent neuron, muscle cell, or gland. The neurotransmitter diffuses 
across the synapse and causes a response (Fig. 3.28).

Neurons interconnect in several types of circuits. In a divergent circuit, each branch in the axon of the 
presynaptic neuron connects with the dendrite of a different postsynaptic neuron. In a convergent circuit, 
axons from several presynaptic neurons meet at the dendrite(s) of a single postsynaptic neuron. In a simple 
feedback circuit, the axon of a neuron connects with the dendrite of an interneuron that connects back with 
the dendrites of the ﬁrst neuron. A two-neuron circuit is one in which a sensory neuron synapses directly 
with a motor neuron, whereas a three-neuron circuit consists of a sensory neuron, an interneuron in the 
spinal cord, and a motor neuron. Both of these circuits can be found in reﬂex arcs (Fig. 3.29). The reﬂex 
arc is a special type of neural circuit that begins with a sensory neuron at a receptor (e.g., a pain 
receptor in the ﬁngertip) and ends with a motor neuron at an effector (e.g., a skeletal muscle). Withdrawal 
reﬂexes are elicited primarily by stimuli for pain and heat great enough to be painful and are also known 
as protective or escape reﬂexes. They allow the body to respond quickly to dangerous situations without 
taking additional time to send signals to and from the brain and to process the information.

The brain is a large soft mass of nervous tissue and has three major parts: (1) cerebrum, (2) diencephalon, 
and (3) brain stem and cerebellum. The cerebrum (Fig. 3.30), which is divided into two hemispheres, is the 
largest and most obvious portion of the brain and consists of many convoluted ridges (gyri), narrow grooves

(sulci), and deep ﬁssures which result in a total surface area of about 2:25 m 2 . The outer layer of the 
cerebrum, the cerebral cortex, is composed of gray matter (neurons with unmyelinated axons) that is 2–4 mm 
thick and contains over 50 billion neurons and 250 billion glial cells called neuroglia. The thicker inner 
layer is the white matter that consists of interconnecting groups of myelinated axons that project from the 
cortex to other cortical areas or from the thalamus (part of the diencephalon) to the cortex. The connection 
between the two cerebral hemispheres is called the corpus callosum (Fig. 3.30b). The left side of the cortex 
controls motor and sensory functions from the right side of the body, whereas the right side controls the 
left side of the body. Association areas that interpret incoming data or coordinate a motor response are 
connected to the sensory and motor regions of the cortex.

Fissures divide each cerebral hemisphere into a series of lobes that have different functions. The functions 
of the frontal lobes include initiating voluntary movement of the skeletal muscles, analyzing sensory 
experiences, providing responses relating to personality, and mediating responses related to memory, 
emotions, reasoning, judgment, planning, and speaking. The parietal lobes respond to stimuli from cutaneous 
(skin) and muscle receptors throughout the body. The temporal lobes interpret some sensory experiences, 
store memories of auditory and visual experiences, and contain auditory centers that receive sensory neurons 
from the cochlea of the ear. The occipital lobes integrate eye movements by directing and focusing the eye 
and are responsible for correlating visual images with previous visual experiences and other sensory 
stimuli. The insula is a deep portion of the cerebrum that lies under the parietal, frontal, and temporal 
lobes. Little is known about its function, but it seems to be associated with gastrointestinal and other 
visceral activities.

The diencephalon is the deep part of the brain that connects the midbrain of the brain stem with the 
cerebral hemispheres. Its main parts are the thalamus, hypothalamus, and epithalamus (Fig. 3.30b). The 
thalamus is involved with sensory and motor systems, general neural background activity, and the expression 
of emotion and

uniquely human behaviors. Due to its two-way communication with areas of the cortex, it is linked with 
thought, creativity, interpretation and understanding of spoken and written words, and identiﬁcation of 
objects sensed by touch. The hypothalamus is involved with integration within the autonomic nervous system, 
temperature regulation, water and electrolyte balance, sleep–wake patterns, food intake, behavioral 
responses associated with emotion, endocrine control, and sexual responses. The epithalamus contains the 
pineal body that is thought to have a neuroendocrine function.

The brain stem connects the brain with the spinal cord and automatically controls vital functions such as 
breathing. Its principal regions include the midbrain, pons, and medulla oblongota (Fig. 3.30b). The 
midbrain connects the pons and cerebellum with the cerebrum and is located at the upper end of the brain 
stem. It is involved with visual reﬂexes, the movement of eyes, focusing of the lenses, and the dilation of 
the pupils. The pons is a rounded bulge between the midbrain and medulla oblongata which functions with the 
medulla oblongata to control respiratory functions, acts as a relay station from the medulla oblongata to 
higher structures in the brain, and is the site of emergence of cranial nerve V. The medulla oblongata is 
the lowermost portion of the brain stem and connects the pons to the spinal cord. It contains vital centers 
that regulate heart rate, respiratory rate, constriction and dilation of blood vessels, blood pressure, 
swallowing, vomiting, sneezing, and coughing. The cerebellum is located behind the pons and is the second 
largest part of the brain. It processes sensory information that is used by the motor systems and is 
involved with coordinating skeletal muscle contractions and impulses for voluntary muscular movement that 
originate in the cerebral cortex. The cerebellum is a processing center that is involved with coordination 
of balance, body positions, and the precision and timing of movements.

3.4.4 Skeletal System

The average adult skeleton contains 206 bones, but the actual number varies from person to person and 
decreases with age as some bones become fused. Like the body, the skeletal system is divided into two parts: 
the axial skeleton and the appendicular skeleton (Fig. 3.31). The axial skeleton contains 80 bones (skull, 
hyoid bone, vertebral column, and thoracic cage), whereas the appendicular skeleton contains 126 (pectoral 
and pelvic girdles and upper and lower extremities). The skeletal system protects and supports the body, 
helps with movement, produces blood cells, and stores important minerals. It is made up of strong, rigid 
bones that are composed of specialized connective tissue, bear weight, and form the major supporting 
elements of the body. Some support also comes from cartilage which is a smooth, ﬁrm, resilient, nonvascular 
type of connective tissue. Since the bones of the skeleton are hard, they protect the organs, such as the 
brain and abdominal organs, that they surround.

There are 8 cranial bones that support, surround, and protect the brain. Fourteen facial bones form the face 
and serve as attachments for the facial muscles that primarily move skin rather than bone. The facial bones, 
except for the lower jaw (mandible), are joined with each other and with the cranial bones. There are 6 
auditory ossicles, 3 in each ear, that transmit sound waves from the external environment to the inner ear. 
The hyoid bone, which is near the skull but not part

of it, is a small U-shaped bone that is located in the neck just below the lower jaw. It is attached to the 
skull and larynx (voice box) by muscles and ligaments and serves as the attachment for several important 
neck and tongue muscles.

The vertebral column starts out with approximately 34 bones, but only 26 independent ones are left in the 
average human adult. There are 7 cervical bones, including the axis which acts as a pivot around which the 
head rotates, and the atlas which sits on the axis and supports the ‘‘globe’’ of the head. These are 
followed by 5 cervical, 12 thoracic, and 5 lumbar vertebrae and then the sacrum and the coccyx. The last two 
consist of 5 fused vertebrae. The vertebral column supports the weight of and allows movement of the head 
and trunk, protects the spinal cord, and provides places for the spinal nerves to exit from the spinal cord. 
There are 4 major curves (cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral/coccygeal) in the adult vertebral column 
which allow it to ﬂex and absorb shock. Although movement between any 2 adjacent vertebrae is generally 
quite limited, the total amount of movement provided by the vertebral column can be extensive. The thoracic 
cage consists of 12 thoracic vertebrae (which are counted as part of the vertebral column), 12 pairs of ribs 
and their associated cartilage, and the sternum (breastbone). It protects vital organs and prevents the 
collapse of the thorax during ventilation.

Bones are classiﬁed as long, short, ﬂat, or irregular according to their shape. Long bones, such as the 
femur and humerus, are longer than they are wide. Short bones, such as those found in the ankle and wrist, 
are as broad as they are long. Flat bones, such as the sternum and the bones of the skull, have a relatively 
thin and ﬂattened shape. Irregular bones do not ﬁt into the other categories and include the bones of the 
vertebral column and the pelvis.

Bones make up about 18% of the mass of the body and have a density of 1:9 g=cm3 . There are two types of 
bone: spongy and compact (cortical). Spongy bone forms the ends (epiphyses) of the long bones and the 
interior of other bones and is quite porous. Compact bone forms the shaft (diaphysis) and outer covering of 
bones and has a tensile strength of 120 N=mm2 , compressive strength of 170 N=mm2 , and Young’s modulus of 
1:8 Â 104 N=mm2 . The medullary cavity, a hollow space inside the diaphysis, is ﬁlled with fatty, yellow 
marrow or red marrow that contains bloodforming cells.

Bone is a living organ that is constantly being remodeled. Old bone is removed by special cells called 
osteoclasts, and new bone is deposited by osteoblasts. Bone remodeling occurs during bone growth and to 
regulate calcium availability. The average skeleton is totally remodeled about three times during a person’s 
lifetime. Osteoporosis is a disorder in which old bone is broken down faster than new bone is produced so 
that the resulting bones are weak and brittle.

The bones of the skeletal system are attached to each other at ﬁbrous, cartilaginous, or synovial joints 
(Fig. 3.32). The articulating bones of ﬁbrous joints are bound tightly together by ﬁbrous connective 
tissue. These joints can be rigid and relatively immovable to slightly movable. This type of joint includes 
the suture joints in the skull. Cartilage holds together the bones in cartilaginous joints. These joints 
allow limited motion in response to twisting or compression and include the joints of the vertebral system 
and the joints that attach the ribs to the vertebral column and to the sternum.

Synovial joints, such as the knee, are the most complex and varied and have ﬂuid-ﬁlled joint cavities, 
cartilage that covers the articulating bones, and ligaments that help hold the joints together.

Synovial joints are classiﬁed into six types based on their structure and the type of motion they permit. 
Gliding joints (Fig. 3.33) are the simplest type of synovial joint, allow back-and-forth or side-to-side 
movement, and include the intercarpal articulations in the wrist. Hinge joints such as the elbow permit 
bending in only one plane and are the most common type of synovial joint. The atlas and axis provide an 
example of a pivot joint that permits rotation. In condyloid articulations, an oval, convex surface of one 
bone ﬁts into a concave depression on another bone. Condyloid joints, which include the metacarpophalangeal 
joints (knuckles) of the ﬁngers, permit ﬂexion–extension and rotation and are considered to bebiaxial 
because rotation islimitedto two axes of movement. The saddle joint, represented by the joint at the base of 
the thumb, is a modiﬁedcondyloidjointthatpermitsmovement inseveraldirections(multiaxial). Balland-socket 
joints allow motion in many directions around a ﬁxed center. In these joints, the ball-shaped head of one 
bone ﬁts into a cuplike concavity of another bone. This 
multiaxialjointisthemostfreelymovableofallandincludestheshoulderandhipjoints. Biomedical engineers have 
helped develop artiﬁcial joints that are routinely used as replacements in diseased or injured hips, 
shoulders, and knees (Fig. 3.34).

3.4.5 Muscular System

The muscular system (Fig. 3.35) is composed of 600–700 skeletal muscles, depending on whether certain 
muscles are counted as separate or as pairs, and makes up 40% of the body’s mass. The axial musculature 
makes up about 60% of the skeletal muscles in the body and arises from the axial skeleton (Fig. 3.31). It 
positions the head and spinal column and moves the rib cage during breathing. The appendicular musculature 
moves or stabilizes components of the appendicular skeleton.

The skeletal muscles in the muscular system maintain posture, generate heat to maintain the body’s 
temperature, and provide the driving force that is used to move the bones and joints of the body and the 
skin of the face. Muscles that play a major

role in accomplishing a movement are called prime movers, or agonists. Muscles that act in opposition to a 
prime mover are called antagonists, whereas muscles that assist a prime mover in producing a movement are 
called synergists. The continual contraction of some skeletal muscles helps maintain the body’s posture. If 
all of these muscles relax, which happens when a person faints, the person collapses.

A system of levers, which consist of rigid lever arms that pivot around ﬁxed points, is used to move 
skeletal muscle (Fig. 3.36). Two forces act on every lever: the weight to be moved (i.e., the resistance to 
be overcome) and the pull or effort applied (i.e., the applied force). Bones act as lever arms and joints 
provide a fulcrum. The resistance to be overcome is the weight of the body part that is moved and the 
applied force is generated by the contraction of a muscle or muscles at the insertion, the point of 
attachment of a muscle to the bone it moves. An example of a ﬁrst-class lever, one in which the fulcrum is 
between the force and the weight, is the movement of the facial portion of the head when the face is tilted 
upwards. The fulcrum is formed by the joint between the atlas and the occipital bone of the skull and the 
vertebral muscles inserted at the back of the head generate the applied force that moves the weight, the 
facial portion of the head. A second-class lever is one in which the weight is between the force and the 
fulcrum. This can be found in the body when a person stands on ‘‘tip toe.’’ The ball of the foot is the 
fulcrum and the applied force is generated by the calf muscles on the back of the leg. The weight that is 
moved is that of the whole body. A third-class lever is one in which the force is between the weight and the 
fulcrum. When a person has a bent elbow and holds a ball in front of the body, the applied force is 
generated by the contraction of the biceps brachii muscle. The weight to be moved

includes the ball and the weight of the forearm and hand, and the elbow acts as the fulcrum.

The three types of muscle tissue—cardiac, skeletal, and smooth—share four important characteristics: (1) 
contractility, the ability to shorten; (2) excitability, the capacity to receive and respond to a stimulus; 
(3) extensibility, the ability to be stretched; (4) and elasticity, the ability to return to the original 
shape after being stretched or contracted. Cardiac muscle tissue is found only in the heart, whereas smooth 
muscle tissue is found within almost every other organ where it forms sheets, bundles, or sheaths around 
other tissues. Skeletal muscles are composed of skeletal muscle tissue, connective tissue, blood vessels, 
and nervous tissue.

Each skeletal muscle is surrounded by a layer of connective tissue (collagen ﬁbers) that separates the 
muscle from surrounding tissues and organs. These ﬁbers come together at the end of the muscle to form 
tendons which connect the skeletal muscle to bone, to skin (face), or to the tendons of other muscles 
(hand). Other connective tissue ﬁbers divide the skeletal muscles into compartments called fascicles that 
contain bundles of muscle ﬁbers. Within each fascicle, additional connective tissue surrounds each skeletal 
muscle ﬁber and ties adjacent ones together. Each skeletal muscle ﬁber has hundreds of nuclei just beneath 
the cell membrane. Multiple nuclei provide multiple copies of the genes that direct the production of 
enzymes and structural proteins needed for normal contraction so that contraction can occur faster.

In muscle ﬁbers, the plasma membrane is called the sarcolemma and the cytoplasm is called the sarcoplasm 
(Fig. 3.37). Transverse tubules (T tubules) begin at the sarcolemma and extend into the sarcoplasm at right 
angles to the surface of the sarcolemma. The T tubules, which play a role in coordinating contraction, are 
ﬁlled with extracellular ﬂuid and form passageways through the muscle ﬁber. They make close contact with 
expanded chambers, cisternae, of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a specialized form of the ER. The cisternae 
contain high concentrations of calcium ions which are needed for contraction to occur.

The sarcoplasm contains cylinders 1 or 2 mm in diameter that are as long as the entire muscle ﬁber and are 
called myoﬁbrils. The myoﬁbrils are attached to the sarcolemma at each end of the cell and are responsible 
for muscle ﬁber contraction. Myoﬁlaments—protein ﬁlaments consisting of thin ﬁlaments (primarily actin) 
and thick ﬁlaments (mostly myosin)—are bundled together to make up myoﬁbrils. Repeating functional units 
of myoﬁlaments are called sarcomeres (Fig. 3.38). The sarcomere is the smallest functional unit of the 
muscle ﬁber and has a resting length of about 2:6 mm. The thin ﬁlaments are attached to dark bands, called 
Z lines, which form the ends of each sarcomere. Thick ﬁlaments containing double-headed myosin molecules 
lie between the thin ones. It is this overlap of thin and thick ﬁlaments that gives skeletal muscle its 
banded, striated appearance. The I band is the area in a relaxed muscle ﬁber that just contains actin 
ﬁlaments, whereas the H zone is the area that just contains myosin ﬁlaments. The H zone and the area in 
which the actin and myosin overlap form the A band.

When a muscle contracts, myosin molecules in the thick ﬁlaments form crossbridges at active sites in the 
actin of the thin ﬁlaments and pull the thin ﬁlaments toward the center of the sarcomere. The 
cross-bridges are then released and reformed at a different active site further along the thin ﬁlament. 
This results in a motion that is similar to the hand-over-hand motion that is used to pull in a rope. This 
action, the sliding ﬁlament mechanism, is driven by ATP energy and results in shortening of the muscle. 
Shortening of the muscle components (contraction) results in bringing the muscle’s attachments (e.g., bones) 
closer together (Fig. 3.38).

Muscle ﬁbers have connections with nerves. Sensory nerve endings are sensitive to length, tension, and pain 
in the muscle and send impulses to the brain via the spinal cord, whereas motor nerve endings receive 
impulses from the brain and spinal cord that lead to excitation and contraction of the muscle. Each motor 
axon branches and supplies several muscle ﬁbers. Each of these axon branches loses its myelin sheath and 
splits up into a number of terminals that make contact with the surface of the muscle. When the nerve is 
stimulated, vesicles in the axon terminals release a neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, into the synapse 
between the neuron and the muscle. Acetylcholine diffuses across the synapse and binds to receptors in a 
special area, the motor end plate, of the sarcolemma. This causes the sodium channels in the sarcolemma to 
open up, and an action potential is produced in the muscle ﬁber. The resulting action potential spreads 
over the entire sarcolemmal surface and travels down all of the T tubules where it triggers a sudden massive 
release of calcium by the cisternae.

Calcium triggers the production of active sites on the thin ﬁlaments so that crossbridges with myosin can 
form and contraction occurs. Acetylcholinesterase breaks down the acetylcholine while the contraction 
process is underway so that the original relatively low permeability of the sarcolemma to sodium is 
restored.

A motor unit is a complex consisting of one motor neuron and the muscle ﬁbers it innervates. All the muscle 
ﬁbers in a single motor unit contract at the same time, whereas muscle ﬁbers in the same muscle but 
belonging to different motor units may contract at different times. When a contracted muscle relaxes, it 
returns to its original (resting) length if another contracting muscle moves it or if it is acted upon by 
gravity. During relaxation, ATP is expended to move calcium back to the cisternae. The active sites that 
were needed for cross-bridge formation become covered so that actin and myosin can no longer interact. When 
the cross-bridges disappear, the muscle returns to its resting length (i.e., it relaxes).

The human body contains two types of skeletal muscle ﬁbers: fast and slow. Fast ﬁbers can contract in 10 
ms or less following stimulation and make up most of the skeletal muscle ﬁbers in the body. They are large 
in diameter and contain densely packed myoﬁbrils, large glycogen reserves (used to produce ATP), and 
relatively few mitochondria. These ﬁbers produce powerful contractions that use up massive amounts of ATP 
and fatigue (can no longer contract in spite of continued neural stimulation) rapidly. Slow ﬁbers take 
about three times as long to contract as fast ﬁbers. They can continue to contract for extended periods of 
time because they contain

(1) a more extensive network of capillaries so that they can receive more oxygen,

(2) a special oxygen-binding molecule called myoglobin, and (3) more mitochondria which can produce more ATP 
than fast ﬁbers. Muscles contain different amounts of slow and fast ﬁbers. Those that are dominated by 
fast ﬁbers (e.g., chicken breast muscles) appear white and those that are dominated by slow ﬁbers (e.g., 
chicken legs) appear red. Most human muscles appear pink because they contain a mixture of both. Genes 
determine the percentage of fast and slow ﬁbers in each muscle, but the ability of fast muscle ﬁbers to 
resist fatigue can be increased through athletic training.

3.5 HOMEOSTASIS

Organ systems work together to maintain a constant internal environment within the body. Homeostasis is the 
process by which physical and chemical conditions within the internal environment of the body are maintained 
within tolerable ranges even when the external environment changes. Body temperature, blood pressure, and 
breathing and heart rates are some of the functions that are controlled by homeostatic mechanisms that 
involve several organ systems working together.

Extracellular ﬂuid—the ﬂuid that surrounds and bathes the body’s cells—plays an important role in 
maintaining homeostasis. It circulates throughout the body and carries materials to and from the cells. It 
also provides a mechanism for maintaining optimal temperature and pressure levels, the proper balance 
between acids and bases, and concentrations of oxygen, carbon dioxide, water, nutrients, and many of the 
chemicals that are found in the blood.

Three components—sensory receptors, integrators, and effectors—interact to maintain homeostasis (Fig. 3.39). 
Sensory receptors, which may be cells or cell parts, detect stimuli (i.e., changes to their environment) and 
send information about the stimuli to integrators. Integrators are control points that pull together 
information from one or more sensory receptors. Integrators then elicit a response from effectors. The brain 
is an integrator that can send messages to muscles or glands or both. The messages result in some type of 
response from the effectors. The brain receives information about how parts of the body are operating and 
can compare this to information about how parts of the body should be operating.

Positive feedback mechanisms are ones in which the initial stimulus is reinforced by the response. There are 
very few examples of this in the human body since it disrupts homeostasis. Childbirth provides one example. 
Pressure from the baby’s head in the birth canal stimulates receptors in the cervix which send signals to 
the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus responds to the stimulus by releasing oxytocin which enhances uterine 
contractions. Uterine contractions increase in intensity and force the baby further into the birth canal 
which causes additional stretching of the receptors in the cervix. The process continues until the baby is 
born, the pressure on the cervical stretch receptors ends, and the hypothalamus is no longer stimulated to 
release oxytocin.

Negative feedback mechanisms result in a response that is opposite in direction to the initiating stimulus. 
For example, receptors in the skin and elsewhere in the body detect the body’s temperature. Temperature 
information is forwarded to the hypothalamus in the brain which compares the body’s current temperature to 
what the temperature should be (approximately 378C). If the body’s temperature is too low, messages are sent 
to contract the smooth muscles in blood vessels near the skin (reducing the diameter of the blood vessels 
and the heat transferred through the skin), to skeletal muscles to start contracting rapidly (shivering), 
and to the arrector pili muscles (Fig. 3.16a) to erect the hairs and form ‘‘goose bumps.’’ The metabolic 
activity of the muscle contractions generates heat and warms the body. If the body’s temperature is too 
high, messages are sent to relax the smooth muscles in

the blood vessels near the skin (increasing the diameter of the blood vessels and the amount of heat 
transferred through the skin) and to sweat glands to release moisture and thus increase evaporative cooling 
of the skin. When the temperature of circulating blood changes enough in the appropriate direction that it 
reaches the set point of the system, the hypothalamus stops sending signals to the effector muscles and 
glands.

Another example of a negative feedback mechanism in the body involves the regulation of glucose in the blood 
stream by clusters of cells, the pancreatic islets (Fig. 3.40). There are between 2 Â 10 5 and 2 Â 10 6 
pancreatic islets scattered throughout the adult pancreas. When glucose levels are high, beta cells in the 
islets produce insulin which facilitates glucose transport across plasma membranes and into cells and 
enhances the conversion of glucose into glycogen which is stored in the liver. During periods of fasting or 
whenever the concentration of blood glucose drops below normal (70–110 mg/dl), alpha cells produce glucagon 
which stimulates the liver to convert glycogen into glucose and the formation of glucose from 
noncarbohydrate sources such as amino acids and lactic acid. When glucose levels return to normal, the 
effector cells in the pancreatic islets stop producing their respective hormone (i.e., insulin or glucagon). 
Some biomedical engineers are working on controlled drug delivery systems that can sense blood glucose 
levels and emulate the responses of the pancreatic islet cells, whereas other biomedical engineers are 
trying to develop an artiﬁcial pancreas that would effectively maintain appropriate blood glucose levels.

EXERCISES

1. Using as many appropriate anatomical terms as apply, write sentences which describe the positional 
relationship between your mouth and (1) your left ear, (2) your nose, and (3) the big toe on your right 
foot.

2. Using as many appropriate anatomical terms as apply, describe the position of the stomach in the body and 
its position relative to the heart.

3. Search the Internet to ﬁnd a transverse section of the body that was imaged using computerized 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Print the image and indicate its web address.

4. Search the Internet to ﬁnd a frontal section of the body that was imaged using CT or MRI. Print the 
image and indicate its web address.

5. Name and give examples of the four classes of biologically important organic compounds. What are the 
major functions of each of these groups?

6. What are the molarity and osmolarity of a 1-liter solution that contains half a mole of calcium chloride? 
How many molecules of chloride would the solution contain?

7. Consider a simple model cell, such as the one in Figure 3.6, that consists of cytoplasm and a plasma 
membrane. The cell’s initial volume is 2 nl and contains 0.2 M protein. The cell is placed in a large volume 
of 0:05 M CaCl2 . Neither Ca þþ nor Cl À can cross the plasma membrane and enter the cell. Is the 0:05 M 
CaCl 2 solution hypotonic, isotonic, or hypertonic relative to the

osmolarity inside the cell? Describe what happens to the cell as it achieves equilibrium in this new 
environment. What will be the ﬁnal osmolarity of the cell? What will be its ﬁnal volume?

8. What does the principle of electrical neutrality mean in terms of the concentration of ions within a 
cell?

9. Consider the same model cell that was used in Exercise 7, but instead of being placed in 0:05 M CaCl 2 , 
the cell is placed in 0:2 M urea. Unlike Caþþ  and Cl À , urea can cross the plasma membrane and enter the 
cell. Describe

what happens to the cell as it achieves equilibrium in this environment. What will be the ﬁnal osmolarity 
of the cell? What will be its ﬁnal volume?

10. Brieﬂy describe the path that a protein (e.g., a hormone) which is manufactured on the rough ER would 
take in order to leave the cell.

11. What major role do mitochondria have in the cell? Why might it be important to have this process 
contained within an organelle?

12. List and brieﬂy describe three organelles that provide structural support and assist with cell 
movement.

13. Find a location on the Internet that describes the Human Genome Project.

Print its home page and indicate its web address. Find and print an ideogram of a chromosome that shows a 
gene that causes cystic ﬁbrosis.

14. Brieﬂy describe the major differences between replication and transcription.

15. Describe how the hereditary information contained in genes within the cell’s DNA is expressed as 
proteins which direct the cell’s activities.

16. Six different codons code for leucine while only one codes for methionine. Why might this be important 
for regulating translation and producing proteins?

17. Insulin (Fig. 3.41) was the ﬁrst protein to be sequenced biochemically.

Assuming that there were no introns involved in the process, what are the possible DNA sequences that 
produced the last four amino acids in the molecule?

18. Copy the title page and abstract of ﬁve peer-reviewed journal articles that discuss engineering 
applications for ﬁve different organ systems in the body (one article per organ system). Review articles, 
conference proceeding papers, copies of keynote addresses and other speeches, book chapters, articles from 
the popular press and newspapers, and editorials are not acceptable. Good places to look are the Annals of 
Biomedical Engineering, the IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, the IEEE Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Magazine, and Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing. What information in the article 
indicates that it was peer-reviewed?

19. Trace the path of a single red blood cell from a capillary bed in your right hand to the capillary beds 
of your right lung and back. What gases are exchanged? Where are they exchanged during this process?

20. Draw and label a block diagram of pulmonary and systemic blood ﬂow that includes the chambers of the 
heart, valves, major veins and arteries that enter and leave the heart, the lungs, and the capillary bed of 
the body. Use arrows to indicate the direction of ﬂow through each component.

21. Find on the Internet an example of an ECG representing normal sinus rhythm and use it to demonstrate how 
heart rate is determined.

22. Why are R waves (Fig. 3.22) used to determine heart rate rather than T waves?

23. How can the stroke volume be determined if a thermal dilution technique is used to determine cardiac 
output?

24. What would be the pulse pressure and mean arterial pressure for a hypertensive person with a systolic 
pressure of 145 mm Hg and a diastolic pressure of 98 mm Hg?

25. The total lung capacity of a patient is 5.5 liters. Find the patient’s inspiratory reserve volume if the 
patient’s vital capacity was 4.2 liters, the tidal volume was 500 ml, and the expiratory reserve volume was 
1.2 liters.

26. What would you need to know or measure to determine the residual volume of the patient described in 
Example Problem 3.10?

27. Brieﬂy describe the functions and major components of the central, peripheral, somatic, automatic, 
sympathetic, and parasympathetic nervous systems. Which ones are subsets of others?

28. Explain how sarcomeres shorten and how that results in muscle contraction.

29. How do the muscular and skeletal systems interact to produce movement?

30. Draw a block diagram to show the negative feedback mechanisms that help regulate glucose levels in the 
blood. Label the inputs, sensors, integrators, effectors, and outputs.

SUGGESTED READING

Brown, B.H., Smallwood, R.H., Barber, D.C., Lawford, P.V. and Hose, D.R. (1999). Medical Physics and 
Biomedical Engineering. Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol and Philadelphia. Cooper, G.M. (2000). The 
Cell—A Molecular Approach, 2nd Ed. ASM Press, Washington, D.C. Deutsch, S. and Deutsch, A. (1993). 
Understanding the Nervous System: An Engineering

Perspective. IEEE Press, New York.

Fox, S.I. (2004). Human Physiology, 8th Ed. McGraw-Hill, Boston.

Germann, W.J. and Stanﬁeld, C.L. (2005). Principles of Human Physiology, 2nd Ed. Pearson

Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco.

Guyton, A.C. (1991). Basic Neuroscience: Anatomy & Physiology. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia. Guyton, A.C. 
and Hall, J.E. (2000). Textbook of Medical Physiology, 10th Ed. W. B. Saunders,

Philadelphia.

Harold, F.M. (2001). The Way of the Cell: Molecules, Organisms and the Order of Life. Oxford

Univ. Press, New York.

Karp, G. (2002). Cell and Molecular Biology—Concepts and Experiments, 3rd Ed. Wiley, New

York.

Katz, A.M. (1986). Physiology of the Heart. Raven Press, New York.

Keynes, R.D. and Aidley, D.J. (1991). Nerve & Muscle, 2nd Ed. Cambridge Univ. Press,

Cambridge.

Leff, A.R. and Schumacker, P.T. (1993). Respiratory Physiology: Basics and Applications.

Saunders, Philadelphia.

Lodish, H., Berk, A., Zipursky, S.L., Matsudaira, P., Baltimore, D. and Darnell, J. (2000).

Molecular Cell Biology, 4th Ed. W. H. Freeman, New York.

Martini, F.H. (2001). Fundamentals of Anatomy & Physiology, 5th Ed. Prentice Hall, Upper

Saddle River, NJ.

Matthews, G.G. (1991). Cellular Physiology of Nerve and Muscle. Blackwell Scientiﬁc, Boston. Pollack, G.H. 
(2001). Cells, Gels and the Engines of Life—A New Unifying Approach to Cell

Function. Ebner & Sons, Seattle, WA.

Rhoades R. and Pﬂanzer, R. (2003). Human Physiology, 4th Ed. Thomson Learning, Paciﬁc

Grove, CA.

Silverthorn, D.U. (2004). Human Physiology—An Integrated Approach, 3rd Ed. Pearson Benja-

min Cummings, San Francisco.

To¨zeren A. and Byers, S.W. (2004). New Biology for Engineers and Computer Scientists. Pearson

Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Van De Graaff, K.M., Fox, S.I. and LaFleur, K.M. (1997). Synopsis of Human Anatomy &

Physiology. Wm. C. Brown, Dubuque, IA.

West, J.B. (1990). Respiratory Physiology—The Essentials, 4th Ed. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore. Widmaier, 
E.P., Raff, H. and Strang, K.T. (2004). Vander, Sherman, & Luciano’s Human

Physiology—The Mechanisms of Body Function. McGraw-Hill, Boston.


