4

BIOMECHANICS

Joseph L. Palladino, PhD Roy B. Davis, PhD

Chapter Contents

4.1 Introduction

4.2 Basic Mechanics

4.2.1 Vector Mathematics

4.2.2 Coordinate Transformations

4.2.3 Static Equilibrium

4.2.4 Anthropomorphic Mass Moments of Inertia

4.2.5 Equations of Motion

4.3 Mechanics of Materials

4.4 Viscoelastic Properties

4.5 Cartilage, Ligament, Tendon, and Muscle

4.5.1 Cartilage

4.5.2 Ligaments and Tendons

4.5.3 Muscle Mechanics

4.6 Clinical Gait Analysis

4.6.1 The Clinical Gait Model

4.6.2 Kinematic Data Analysis

4.6.3 Kinetic Data Analysis

4.6.4 Clinical Gait Interpretation

4.7 Cardiovascular Dynamics

4.7.1 Blood Rheology

4.7.2 Arterial Vessels

4.7.3 Heart Mechanics

4.7.4 Cardiovascular Modeling

Exercises Suggested Reading

At the conclusion of this chapter, students will be able to:

&

& &

& & &

& &

& & & &

Understand the application of engineering kinematic relations to biomechanical problems.

Understand the application of engineering kinetic relations to biomechanical problems. Understand the 
application of engineering mechanics of materials to biological structures.

Use MATLAB to write and solve biomechanical static and dynamic equations.

Use Simulink to study viscoelastic properties of biological tissues.

Understand how kinematic equations of motion are used in clinical analysis of human gait.

Understand how kinetic equations of motion are used in clinical analysis of human gait. Explain how 
biomechanics applied to human gait is used to quantify pathological conditions, to suggest surgical and 
clinical treatments, and to quantify their effectiveness. Understand basic rheology of biological ﬂuids.

Understand the development of models that describe blood vessel mechanics. Understand basic heart mechanics.

Explain how biomechanics applied to the cardiovascular system is used to quantify the effectiveness of the 
heart as a pump, to study heart–vessel interaction, and to develop clinical applications.

4.1 INTRODUCTION

Biomechanics combines engineering and the life sciences by applying principles from classical mechanics to 
the study of living systems. This relatively new ﬁeld covers a broad range of topics, including strength of 
biological materials, bioﬂuid mechanics in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, material properties 
and interactions of medical implants and the body, heat and mass transfer into biological tissues (e.g., 
tumors), biocontrol systems regulating metabolism or voluntary motion, and kinematics and kinetics applied 
to study human gait. The great breadth of the ﬁeld of biomechanics arises from the complexities and variety 
of biological organisms and systems.

The goals of this chapter are twofold—to apply basic engineering principles to biological structures, and 
then to develop clinical applications. Section 4.2 provides a review of concepts from introductory statics 
and dynamics. Section 4.3 presents concepts from mechanics of material that are fundamental for engineers 
and accessible to those with only a statics/dynamics background. Section 4.4 introduces viscoelastic 
complexities characteristic of biological materials, with the concepts further applied in Section 4.5: 
Cartilage, Ligament, Tendon, and Muscle. The last two sections bring all of this information together in two 
‘‘real world’’ biomechanics applications: human gait analysis and cardiovascular dynamics.

The human body is a complex machine with the skeletal system and ligaments forming the framework and the 
muscles and tendons serving as the motors and cables. Human gait biomechanics may be viewed as a structure 
(skeleton) comprised of levers (bones) with pivots (joints) that move as the result of net forces produced 
by pairs of agonist and antagonist muscles. Consequently, the strength of the structure and the action of 
muscles will be of fundamental importance. Using a similar functional model, the cardiovascular system may 
be viewed as a complex pump (heart) pumping a complex ﬂuid (blood) into a complex set of pipes (blood 
vessels). An extensive suggested reading list for both gait and cardiovascular dynamics permits the reader 
to go beyond the very introductory nature of this textbook.

The discipline of mechanics has a long history. For lack of more ancient records, the history of mechanics 
starts with the ancient Greeks and Aristotle (384–322 BC ). Hellenic mechanics devised a correct concept of 
statics, but those of dynamics, fundamental in living systems, did not begin until the end of the Middle 
Ages and the beginning of the modern era. Starting in the sixteenth century, the ﬁeld of dynamics advanced 
rapidly with work by Kepler, Galileo, Descartes, Huygens, and Newton. Dynamic laws were subsequently 
codiﬁed by Euler, LaGrange, and LaPlace (see A History of Mechanics by Dugas).

In Galileo’s Two New Sciences (1638) the subtitle Attenenti all Mecanica & i Movimenti Locali (Pertaining to 
Mechanics and Local Motions) refers to force, motion, and strength of materials. Since then, ‘‘mechanics’’ 
has been extended to describe the forces and motions of any system, ranging from quanta, atoms, molecules, 
gases, liquids, solids, structures, stars, and galaxies. The biological world is consequently a natural 
object for the study of mechanics.

The relatively new ﬁeld of biomechanics applies mechanical principles to the study of living systems. The 
eminent professor of biomechanics Dr. Y.C. Fung describes the role of biomechanics in biology, physiology, 
and medicine:

Physiology can no more be understood without biomechanics than an airplane can without aerodynamics. For an 
airplane, mechanics enables us to design its structure and predict its performance. For an organ, 
biomechanics helps us to understand its normal function, predict changes due to alteration, and propose 
methods of artiﬁcial intervention. Thus diagnosis, surgery and prosthesis are closely associated with 
biomechanics.1 

Clearly, biomechanics is essential to assessing and improving human health.

The following is a brief list of biomechanical milestones, especially those related to the topics in this 
chapter:

Galen of Pergamon (129–199) Published extensively in medicine, including De Motu Muscularum (On the 
Movements of Muscles). He realized that motion requires muscle contraction.

Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) Made the ﬁrst accurate descriptions of ball-andsocket joints, such as the 
shoulder and hip, calling the latter the ‘‘polo dell’omo’’

(pole of man). His drawings depicted mechanical force acting along the line of muscle ﬁlaments.

AndreasVesalius(1514–1564)PublishedDeHumaniCorporisFabrica(TheFabricof the Human Body). Based on human 
cadaver dissections, his work led to a more accurate anatomical description of human musculature than 
Galen’s and demonstrated that motion results from the contraction of muscles that shorten and thicken.

Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) Studied medicine and physics, integrated measurement and observation in science, 
and concluded that mathematics is an essential tool of science. His analyses included the biomechanics of 
jumping and the gait analysis of horses and insects, as well as dimensional analysis of animal bones.

Santorio Santorio (1561–1636) Used Galileo’s method of measurement and analysis and found that the human 
body changes weight with time. This observation led to the study of metabolism and, thereby, ushered in the 
scientiﬁc study of medicine.

William Harvey (1578–1657) Developed an experimental basis for the modern circulation concept of a closed 
path between arteries and veins. The structural basis, the capillary, was discovered by Malpighi in 1661.

Giovanni Borelli (1608–1679) A mathematician who studied body dynamics, muscle contraction, animal movement, 
and motion of the heart and intestines. He published De Motu Animalium (On the Motion of Animals) in 1680.

Jan Swammerdam (1637–1680) Introduced the nerve–muscle preparation, stimulating muscle contraction by 
pinching the attached nerve in the frog leg. He also showed that muscles contract with little change in 
volume, refuting the previous belief that muscles contract when ‘‘animal spirits’’ ﬁll them, causing 
bulging.

Robert Hooke (1635–1703) Devised Hooke’s Law, relating the stress and elongation of elastic materials, and 
used the term cell in biology.

Isaac Newton (1642–1727) Not known for biomechanics work, but he developed calculus, the classical laws of 
motion, and the constitutive equation for viscous ﬂuid, all of which are fundamental to biomechanics.

Nicholas Andre´(1658–1742) Coined the term orthopaedics at the age of eighty and believed that muscular 
imbalances cause skeletal deformities.

Stephen Hales (1677–1761) Was likely the ﬁrst to measure blood pressure, as described in his book 
Statistical Essays: Containing Haemostaticks, or an Account of some Hydraulick and Hydrostatical Experiments 
made on the Blood and Blood-Vessels of Animals; etc., in 1733.

Leonard Euler (1707–1783) Generalized Newton’s laws of motion to continuum representations that are used 
extensively to describe rigid body motion, and studied pulse waves in arteries.

Thomas Young (1773–1829) Studied vibrations and voice, wave theory of light and vision, and devised Young’s 
modulus of elasticity.

Ernst Weber (1795–1878) and Eduard Weber (1806–1871) Published Die Mechanik der meschlichen Gerwerkzeuge (On 
the Mechanics of the Human Gait Tools) in 1836, pioneering the scientiﬁc study of human gait.

Hermann von Helmholtz (1821–1894) Studied an immense array of topics, including optics, acoustics, 
thermodynamics, electrodynamics, physiology, and medicine, including ophthalmoscopy, ﬂuid mechanics, nerve 
conduction speed, and the heat of muscle contraction.

Etienne Marey (1830–1904) Analyzed the motion of horses, birds, insects, ﬁsh, and humans. His inventions 
included force plates to measure ground reaction forces and the Chronophotographe a pellicule, or motion 
picture camera.

Wilhelm Braune and Otto Fischer (research conducted from 1895–1904) Published Der Gang des Menschen (The 
Human Gait), containing the mathematical analysis of human gait and introducing methods still in use. They 
invented ‘‘cyclography’’ (now called interrupted-light photography with active markers), pioneered the use 
of multiple cameras to reconstruct 3D motion data, and applied Newtonian mechanics to estimate joint forces 
and limb accelerations.

4.2 BASIC MECHANICS

This section reviews some of the main points from any standard introductory mechanics (statics and dynamics) 
course. Good references abound, such as Engineering Mechanics by Merriam and Kraige (2002). A review of 
vector mathematics is followed by matrix coordinate transformations, a topic new to some students. Euler’s 
equations of motion (section 4.2.5) may also be new material. For both topics, Principles of Dynamics by 
Greenwood provides a comprehensive reference.

4.2.1 Vector Mathematics

Forces may be written in terms of scalar components and unit vectors (of magnitude equal to one), or in 
polar form with magnitude and direction. Figure 4.1 shows that

the 2-dimensional vector F is comprised of the i component, F x , in the x direction, and the j component, F 
y , in the y direction, or

F¼Fx i þ Fy j

(4:1)

as in 20i þ 40j lb. In this chapter vectors are set in bold type. This same vector may be written in polar 
form in terms of the vector’s magnitude jFj, also called the norm, and the vector’s angle of orientation, u:

qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ jFj ¼ F x 2 þ Fy 2 

(4:2)

Fy  u ¼ arctan Fx 

(4:3)

yielding jFj ¼ 44:7 lb and u ¼ 63:4  . Vectors are similarly represented in three dimensions in terms of 
their i, j and k components:

F¼Fx i þ Fy j þ Fz k

(4:4)

with k in the z direction.

Often, a vector’s magnitude and two points along its line of action are known. Consider the 3-dimensional 
vector in Figure 4.2. F has magnitude of 10 lb, and its line of action passes from the origin (0,0,0) to the 
point (2,6,4). F is written as the product of the magnitude jFj and a unit vector e F that points along its 
line of action:

F ¼ jFjeF 

2i þ 6j þ 4k ¼ 10 lb pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  2 2 þ 6 2 þ 4 2 

F ¼ 2:67i þ 8:02j þ 5:34k lb

The quantity in parentheses is the unit vector of F, or

eF ¼

2i þ 6j þ 4k pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ • 2 2 þ 6 2 þ 42 



¼ 0:267i þ 0:802j þ 0:534k

and the magnitude of F is

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ jFj ¼ 2:67 2 þ 
8:02 2 þ 5:342  ¼ 10 lb

The vector F in Figure 4.2 may also be deﬁned in 3-D space in terms of the angles between its line of 
action and each coordinate axis. Consider the angles u x , u y , and uz  that are measured from the positive 
x, y, and z axes, respectively, to F. Then

Fx  cos u x ¼ jFj

(4:5)

Fy  cos u y ¼ jFj

(4:6)

Fz  cos u z ¼ jFj

(4:7)

These ratios are termed the direction cosines of F. The unit vector e F is equivalent to

e F ¼ cos u x i þ cos u y j þ cos u z k

(4:8)

or, in general

B F x i þ F y j þ Fz k C e F ¼ @ qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ2 z ﬃ A F 2 þ F 2 þ F 
x y

0

1

(4:9)

The angles u x , u y , and u z for this example are consequently

2:67 u x ¼ arccos ¼ 74:5   10 

8:02 u y ¼ arccos ¼ 36:7   10 

5:34 u z ¼ arccos ¼ 57:7   10 

Vectors are added by summing their components:

A¼Ax i þ Ay j þ Az k

B¼Bx i þ By j þ Bz k

C ¼ A þ B ¼ (A x þ B x )i þ (A y þ B y )j þ (A z þ B z )k

In general, a set of forces may be combined into an equivalent force denoted the resultant R, where

X X X R ¼ Fx i þ Fy j þ Fz k

(4:10)

as will be illustrated in subsequent sections. Vectors are subtracted similarly by subtracting vector 
components.

Vector multiplication consists of two distinct operations, the dot and cross products. The dot, or scalar, 
product of vectors A and B produces a scalar via

A Á B ¼ AB cos u

(4:11)

where u is the angle between the vectors. For an orthogonal coordinate system, where all axes are 908 apart

iÁi¼jÁj¼kÁk¼1 i Á j ¼ j Á k ¼ k Á i ¼ ÁÁÁ ¼ 0

(4:12)

For example:

A ¼ 3i þ 2j þ k ft B ¼ À2i þ 3j þ 10k lb

A Á B ¼ 3(À2) þ 2(3) þ 1(10) ¼ 10 ft lb

Note that the dot product is commutative (i.e., A Á B  B Á A).

The physical interpretation of the dot product A Á B is the projection of A onto B, or, equivalently, the 
projection of B onto A. For example, work is deﬁned as the force that acts in the same direction as the 
motion of a body. Figure 4.3 (left) shows a force vector F dotted with a direction of motion vector d. The 
work W done by F is given by F Á d  Fd cos u. Dotting F with d yields the component of F acting in the same 
direction as d.

The moment of a force about a point or axis is a measure of its tendency to cause rotation. The cross, or 
vector, product of two vectors yields a new vector that points along the axis of rotation. For example, 
Figure 4.3 (right) shows a vector F acting in the x–y plane at a distance from the body’s coordinate center 
O. The vector r points from O to the line of action of F. The cross product r Â F is a vector that points in 
the z direction along the body’s axis of rotation. If F and r are 3-dimensional (k components), their cross 
product will have additional components of rotation about the x and y axes. The moment M resulting from 
crossing r into F is written

M¼Mx i þ My j þ Mz k

(4:13)

where M x , M y , and M z cause rotation of the body about the x, y, and z axes, respectively.

Cross products may be taken by crossing each vector component term by term, for example:

A Â B ¼ 3(À2)i Â i þ 3(3)i Â j þ 3(10)i Â k þ 2(À2)j Â i þ 2(3)j Â j þ 2(10)j Â k þ 1(À2)k Â i þ 1(3)k Â j þ 
1(10)k Â k

The magnitude jA Â Bj ¼ AB sin u, where u is the angle between A and B. Consequently, for an orthogonal 
coordinate system the cross products of all like terms equal zero, and i Â j ¼ k, j Â k ¼ i, k Â i ¼ j, i Â 
k ¼ Àj, and so on. The previous example yields

A Â B ¼ 9k À 30j þ 4k þ 20i À 2j À 3i ¼ 17i À 32j þ 13k lb ft

Note that the cross product is not commutative (i.e., A Â B  6 B Â A).

Cross products of vectors are commonly computed using matrices. The previous example A Â B is given by the 
matrix

• i 

j

k

 

  A Â B ¼  A x A y A z   

 B x B y B z   

 i   ¼  3   À2 

j 2 3

k    1 

 10  

(4:14)

¼ i[(2)(10) À (1)(3)] À j[(3)(10) À (1)(À2)] þ k[(3)(3) À (2)(À2)] ¼ i(20 À 3) À j(30 þ 2) þ k(9 þ 4) ¼ 17i 
À 32j þ 13k lb ft

Example Problem 4.1

The vector F in Figure 4.4 has a magnitude of 10 kN and points along the dashed line as shown. (a) Write F 
as a vector. (b) What is the component of F in the x–z plane? (c) What moment does F generate about the 
origin (0,0,0)?

Solution

This example problem is solved using MATLAB. The ) prompt denotes input and the percent sign, %, precedes 
comments (ignored by MATLAB). Lines that begin without the ) prompt are MATLAB output. Some spaces in the 
following output were omitted to conserve space.

) ) )

%(a) First write the direction vector d that points along F % as a 1D array:

d ¼ [12 À15 9]

d ¼ 12 À15 9 ) % Now write the unit vector of F, giving its direction: ) unit_vector ¼ d/norm (d)

unit_vector ¼ 0.5657

À0.7071

0.4243

) % F consists of the magnitude 10 kN times this unit vector ) F ¼ 10 * unit_vector

F ¼ 5.6569

À7.0711

4.2426

) )

% Or, more directly F ¼ 10 * (d/norm(d) )

F ¼ 5.6569

À7.0711

4.2426

) % (b) First write the vector r_xz that points in the xz plane: ) r_xz ¼ [12 0 9] r_xz ¼ 12 0 9

) ) ) )

% The dot product is given by the sum of all the term by term % multiplications of elements of vectors F and 
r_xz F_dot_r_xz ¼ sum(F. * r_xz) % or simply, dot(F,r_xz)

F_dot_r_xz ¼ 106.0660

) ) )

% (c) Cross F with a vector that points from the origin to F. % The cross product is given by the cross 
function r_xz_cross_F ¼ cross(r_xz,F)

r_xz_cross_F ¼ 63.6396

0

À84.8528

) % Note that the cross product is not commutative ) cross(F,r_xz) ans ¼ À63.6396 0 84.8528

) % Vectors are added and subtracted in MATLAB using the + and À ) % operations, respectively.

&

4.2.2 Coordinate Transformations 3-D Direction Cosines

When studying the kinematics of human motion, it is often necessary to transform body or body segment 
coordinates from one coordinate system to another. For example, coordinates corresponding to a coordinate 
system determined by markers on the body (a moving coordinate system) must be translated to coordinates with 
respect to the ﬁxed laboratory (inertial coordinate system). These 3-dimensional transformations use 
direction cosines that are computed as follows.

Consider the vector A measured in terms of the uppercase coordinate system XYZ, shown in Figure 4.5 in terms 
of the unit vectors I, J, K.

A¼Ax I þ Ay J þ Az K

(4:15)

The unit vectors I, J, K can be written in terms of i, j, k in the xyz system

I ¼ cos u xX i þ cos u yX j þ cos u zX k

(4:16)

J ¼ cos u xY i þ cos u yY j þ cos u zY k

(4:17)

K ¼ cos u xZ i þ cos u yZ j þ cos u zZ k

(4:18)

where u xX is the angle between i and I, and similarly for the other angles.

Substituting Eqs. 4.16–4.18 into Eq. 4.15 gives

A ¼ A x [ cos u xX i þ cos u yX j þ cos u zX k]

(4:19)

þ A y [ cos u xY i þ cos u yY j þ cos u zY k]

þ A z [ cos u xZ i þ cos u yZ j þ cos u zZ k]

or

A ¼ (A x cos u xX þ A y cos u xY þ A z cos u xZ )i

(4:20)

þ (A x cos u yX þ A y cos u yY þ A z cos u yZ )j

þ (A x cos u zX þ A y cos u zY þ A z cos u zZ )k

Consequently, A may be represented in terms of I, J, K or i, j, k.

Euler Angles

The coordinates of a body in one orthogonal coordinate system may be related to another orthogonal 
coordinate system via Euler angle transformation matrices. For example, one coordinate system might 
correspond to markers placed on the patient’s pelvis and the other coordinate system might correspond to the 
patient’s thigh. The two coordinate systems are related by a series of rotations about each original axis in 
turn. Figure 4.6 shows the xyz coordinate axes with a y–x–z rotation sequence. First, xyz is rotated about 
the y axis (top), transforming the ijk unit vectors into the i 0 j 0 k0  unit vectors, via the equations

i 0 ¼ cos u y i À sin u y k

(4:21)

j0 ¼j

(4:22)

k 0 ¼ sin u y i þ cos u y k

(4:23)

This new primed coordinate system is then rotated about the x axis (Fig. 4.6, middle), giving the 
double-primed system:

i00 ¼i0 

(4:24)

j 00 ¼ cos u x j 0 þ sin u x k0 

(4:25)

k 00 ¼ Àsin u x j 0 þ cos u x k0 

(4:26)

Finally, the double-primed system is rotated about the z axis, giving the triple-primed system:

i 000 ¼ cos u z i 00 þ sin u z j00 

(4:27)

j 000 ¼Àsin u z i 00 þ cos u z j00 

(4:28)

k000 ¼k00 

(4:29)

The three rotations may be written in matrix form to directly translate ijk into i000 j000 k000 :

2 3 2 32 32 32 3 i 000 cos u z sin u z 0 1 0 0 cos u y 0 À sin u y i 6 7 6 76 76 76 7 4 j 000 5 ¼ 4 À sin u 
z cos u z 0 54 0 cos u x sin u x 54 0 1 0 54 j 5

(4:30)

k 000 0 0 1 0 À sin u x cos u x sin u y 0 cos u y k 2 32 32 3 cos u z sin u z cos u x sin u z sin u x cos u 
y 0 À sin u y i 6 76 76 7 ¼ 4 À sin u z cos u z cos u x cos u z sin u x 54 0 1 0 54 j 5

0

À

sin

ux 

cos

ux 

sin u y 0 cos uy 

k

2 3 2 32 3 i 000 cosu z cosu y þ sinu z sinu x sinu y sinu z cosu x Àcosu z sinu y þ sinu z sinu x cosu y i 
4 j 000 5 ¼ 4 Àsinu z cosu y þ cosu z sinu x sinu y cosu z cosu x sinu z sinu y þ cosu z sinu x cosu y 54 j 
5

k000 

cosu x sinuy 

Àsinux 

cosu x cosuy 

k

(4:31)

If the angles of coordinate system rotation (u x , u y , u z ) are known, coordinates in the xyz 000 000 000 
system can be transformed into the x y z system. Alternatively, if both the unprimed and triple-primed 
coordinates are known, the angles may be computed as follows

k 000 Á j ¼ À sin ux 

(4:32)

000 u x ¼ Àarcsin(k Á j)

k 000 Á i ¼ cos u x sin uy  " 000 # k Ái u y ¼ arcsin cos ux 

(4:33)

000 i Á j ¼ sin u z cos ux  " 000 # i Áj u z ¼ arcsin cos ux 

(4:34)

Example Problem 4.2

Write the Euler angle transformation matrices for the y–x–z rotation sequence using the MATLAB symbolic math 
toolbox.

Solution

% eulerangles.m % % Euler angles for y-x-z rotation sequence % using MATLAB symbolic math toolbox % % x, y 
and z are thetax, thetay and thetaz, respectively % First deﬁne them as symbolic variables

syms x y z

% Writing equations 4.21–23 as a matrix A

A ¼ [ cos(y), 0, 0, 1, sin(y), 0,

Àsin(y); 0; cos(y)]

% equations 4.24–26 as matrix B

B ¼ [ 1, 0, 0,

0, cos(x), Àsin(x),

0; sin(x); cos(x)]

% and equations 4.27–29 as matrix C C ¼ [ cos(z), sin(z), 0;

Àsin(z), cos(z), 0; 0, 0, 1]

% The matrix equation 4.30 is created by multiplying matrices C, B % and A

D ¼ C * B * A

The resulting transformation matrix from the preceding m-ﬁle is D¼ [cos(z) * cos(y)+sin(z) * sin(x) * 
sin(y), sin(z) * cos(x), Àcos(z) * sin(y)+sin(z) * sin(x) * cos(y)] [Àsin(z) * cos(y)+cos(z) * sin(x) * 
sin(y), cos(z) * cos(x), sin(z) * sin(y)+cos(z) * sin(x) * cos(y)] [cos(x) * sin(y), Àsin(x), cos(x) * 
cos(y)]

Which is the same as Eq. 4.31.

&

The Euler transformation matrices are used differently depending on the available data. For example, if the 
body coordinates in both the ﬁxed (unprimed) and body (triple-primed) systems are known, the body angles u 
x , u y , and u z can be computed (e.g., Eqs. 4.32–4.34 for a y–x–z rotation sequence). Alternatively, the 
body’s initial position and the angles u x , u y , and u z may be used to compute the body’s ﬁnal position.

Example Problem 4.3

An aircraft undergoes 30 degrees of pitch (u x ), then 20 degrees of roll (u y ), and ﬁnally 10 degrees of 
yaw (u z ). Write a MATLAB function that computes the Euler angle transformation matrix for this series of 
angular rotations.

Solution

Since computers use radians for trigonometric calculations, ﬁrst write two simple functions to compute 
cosines and sines in degrees:

function y ¼ cosd(x) %COSD(X) cosines of the elements of X measured in degrees. y ¼ cos(pi * x/180);

function y ¼ sind(x) %SIND(X) sines of the elements of X measured in degrees. y ¼ sin(pi * x/180);

Next write the x–y–z rotation sequence transformation matrix

function D ¼ eulangle (thetax, thetay, thetaz) %EULANGLE matrix of rotations by Euler’s angles.

% EULANGLE(thetax, thetay, thetaz) yields the matrix of % rotation of a system of coordinates by Euler’s % 
angles thetax, thetay and thetaz, measured in degrees.

% Now the ﬁrst rotation is about the x axis, so we use eqs. 4.24–26

A¼[1 0 0

0 cosd(thetax) Àsind(thetax)

0 sind(thetax) cosd(thetax) ];

% Next is the y axis rotation (Eqs. 4.21–23)

B ¼ [ cosd(thetay) 0 sind(thetay)

0

1

0

Àsind(thetay) 0 cosd(thetay) ];

% Finally, the z axis rotation (Eqs. 4.27–29)

C¼[

cosd(thetaz)

Àsind(thetaz) 0

sind(thetaz) cosd(thetaz) 0

0

0

1

];

% Multiplying rotation matrices C, B and A as in Eq. 4.30 gives the solution:

D¼C * B * A;

Now use this function to compute the numerical transformation matrix:

) eulangle(30,20,10) ans ¼

0.9254 0.3188 À0.1632 0.8232

0.3420 À0.4698

À0.2049

0.5438

0.8138

This matrix can be used to convert any point in the initial coordinate system (premaneuver) to its position 
after the roll, pitch, and yaw maneuvers have been executed. &

4.2.3 Static Equilibrium

Newton’s equations of motion applied to a structure in static equilibrium reduce to the following vector 
equations

X F ¼ 0 (4:35) X

M ¼ 0 (4:36)

These equations are applied to biological systems in the same manner as standard mechanical structures. 
Analysis begins with a drawing of the free-body diagram of the body segment(s) of interest with all 
externally applied loads and reaction forces at the supports. Orthopedic joints can be modeled with 
appropriate ideal joints (e.g., hinge, ball-and-socket, etc.) as discussed in Chapter 3 (Fig. 3.33).

Example Problem 4.4

Figure 4.7 (top) shows a Russell’s traction rig used to apply an axial, tensile force to a fractured femur 
for immobilization. (a) What magnitude weight w must be suspended from the free end of the cable to maintain 
the leg in static equilibrium? (b) Compute the average tensile force applied to the thigh under these 
conditions.

Solution

The free body diagram for this system is shown in the lower panel of Figure 4.7. If the pulleys are assumed 
frictionless and of small radius, the cable tension T is constant throughout. Using Eq. 4.35,

F 1 þ F 2 þ F 3 þ F femur À mg j ¼ 0

Writing each force in vector form,

F 1 ¼ ÀF 1 i ¼ ÀTi F 2 ¼ (ÀF 2 cos 308)i þ (F 2 sin 308)j

¼ (ÀT cos 308)i þ (T sin 308)j

F 3 ¼ (F 3 cos 408)i þ (F 3 sin 408)j ¼ (T cos 408)i þ (T sin 408)j

F femur ¼ (F femur cos 208)i À (F femur sin 208)j

Using Table 4.1, and neglecting the weight of the thigh, the weight of the foot and leg is 0.061 multiplied 
by total body weight, yielding mgj ¼ (0:061)(150j lb) ¼ 9:2j lb Summing the x components gives

ÀT À T cos 308 þ T cos 408 þ F femur cos 208 ¼ 0

Summing the y components gives

T sin 308 þ T sin 408 À F femur sin 208 À mg ¼ 0

The last two expressions may be solved simultaneously, giving both T, which is equal to the required 
externally applied weight, and the axial tensile force, Ffemur  T ¼ 12:4 lb F femur¼ 14:5 lb

Example Problem 4.5

A 160-lb person is holding a 10-lb weight in his palm with the elbow ﬁxed at 908 ﬂexion (Fig. 4.8, top). 
(a) What force must the biceps generate to hold the forearm in static equilibrium? (b) What force(s) does 
the forearm exert on the humerus?

Solution

Figure 4.8 (bottom) shows the free-body diagram of this system. Due to the increased number of unknowns, 
compared to the previous example, both Eqs. 4.35 and 4.36 will be used. Summing moments about the elbow at 
point O, the equilibrium equation S M ¼ 0 can be written as

Àr OE Â (ÀF A ) þ r OB Â (À10 lb)j þ r OP Â (À3:5 lb)j ¼ 0

(À2 in)i Â (ÀF A )j þ (12 in)i Â (À10 lb)j þ (9:25 in)i Â (À3:5 lb)j ¼ 0

(2 in)F A k À (120 lb in)k À (32:4 lb in)k ¼ 0 Solving this last expression for the one unknown, F A , the 
vertical force at the elbow: F A ¼ 76:2 lb To ﬁnd the unknown horizontal force at the elbow, F C , and the 
unknown force the biceps must generate, F B , the other equation of equilibrium SF ¼ 0 is used:

F C i À F A j þ (ÀF B cos 758i þ F B sin 758j) À 10 lb j À 3:5 lb j ¼ 0 Summing the x and y components gives

F C À F B cos (758) ¼ 0

F B sin (758) À 10 lb À 3:5 lb ¼ 0 Solving these last two equations simultaneously and using F A ¼ 76:2 lb 
gives the force of the biceps muscle, F B , and the horizontal elbow force, F C :

ÀFA 

þ

F B ¼ 92:9 lb F C ¼ 24:1 lb &

Example Problem 4.6

The force plate depicted in Figure 4.9 has four sensors, one at each corner, that read the vertical forces F 
1 , F 2 , F 3 , and F 4 . If the plate is square with side of length ‘ and forces F 1 À F 4 are known, write 
two expressions that will give the x and y locations of the resultant force R.

Solution

The resultant magnitude R can be computed from the sum of forces in the z direction:

X Fz ¼0

F 1 þ F 2 þ F 3 þ F4 ÀR¼0

R¼F 1 þ F 2 þ F 3 þ F4 

The force plate remains horizontal; hence the sum of the moments about the x and y axes must each be zero. 
Taking moments about the x axis,

X Mx ¼0

F 2 ‘ þ F 3 ‘ À Ry ¼ 0

(F2  þ F 3 )‘ y¼ R

Similarly, summing moments about the y axis,

X My ¼0

F 1 ‘ þ F 2 ‘ À Rx ¼ 0

(F 1 þ F 2 )‘ x¼ R

The coordinates x and y locate the resultant R.

&

4.2.4 Anthropomorphic Mass Moments of Inertia

A body’s mass resists linear motion; its mass moment of inertia resists rotation. The resistance of a body 
(or a body segment such as a thigh in gait analysis) to rotation is quantiﬁed by the body or body segment’s 
moment of inertia I:

Z I ¼ r 2 dm

(4:37)

m

where m is the body mass and r is the the moment arm to the axis of rotation. The incremental mass dm can be 
written rdV. For a body with constant density r the moment of inertia can be found by integrating over the 
body’s volume V:

Z I ¼ r r 2 dV

(4:38)

V

This general expression can be written in terms of rotation about the x, y, and z axes:

Z I xx ¼ (y 2 þ z 2 )rdV

ZV  I yy ¼ (x 2 þ z 2 )rdV

(4:39)

ZV  I zz ¼ (x 2 þ y 2 )rdV

The radius of gyration k is the moment arm between the axis of rotation and a single point where all of the 
body’s mass is concentrated. Consequently, a body segment may be treated as a point mass with moment of 
inertia,

I ¼ mk2 

(4:40)

where m is the body segment mass. The moment of inertia with respect to a parallel axis I is related to the 
moment of inertia with respect to the body’s center of mass Icm  via the parallel axis theorem:

I ¼ I cm þ md2 

(4:41)

where d is the perpendicular distance between the two parallel axes. Anthropomorphic data for various body 
segments are listed in Table 4.1.

Example Problem 4.7

A 150-lb person has a thigh length of 17 in. Find the moment of inertia of this body segment with respect to 
its center of mass in SI units.

Solution

Thigh length in SI units is

‘ thigh ¼ 17 in ¼ 0:432 m

Table 4.1 lists ratios of segment weight to body weight for different body segments. Starting with body 
mass,

m body ¼ (150 lb)(0:454 kg=lb) ¼ 68:1 kg

the thigh segment mass is

m thigh ¼ (0:100)(68:1 kg) ¼ 6:81 kg

Table 4.1 also lists body segment center of mass and radius of gyration as ratios with respect to segment 
length for each body segment. Table 4.1 gives both proximal and distal segment length ratios. Note that 
‘‘proximal’’ for the thigh refers toward the hip and ‘‘distal’’ refers toward the knee. Consequently, the 
proximal thigh segment length is the distance between the thigh center of mass and the hip, and the distal 
thigh segment length is the distance between the thigh center of mass and the knee. The moment of inertia of 
the thigh with respect to the hip is therefore

I thigh=hip ¼ mk 2 ¼ (6:81 kg)[(0:540)(0:432 m)] 2 ¼ 0:371 kg m2 

The thigh’s moment of inertia with respect to the hip is related to the thigh’s moment of inertia with 
respect to its center of mass via the parallel axis theorem (Eq. 4.41),

I thigh=hip¼ I thigh=cmþ md2

so

I thigh=cm ¼ I thigh=hip À md2 

In this case, distance d is given by the proximal segment length data:

d ¼ (0:432 m)(0:433) ¼ 0:187 m

and the ﬁnal result is

I thigh=cm ¼ 0:371 kg m 2 À (6:81 kg)(0:187 m) 2 ¼ 0:133 kg m2 

&

4.2.5 Equations of Motion

Vector equations of motion are used to describe the translational and rotational kinetics of bodies.

Newton’s Equations of Motion

Newton’s second law relates the net force F and the resulting translational motion as

F ¼ ma

(4:42)

where a is the linear acceleration of the body’s center of mass for translation. For rotation

M ¼ Ia

(4:43)

where Ia is the body’s angular momentum. Hence, the rate of change of a body’s angular momentum is equal to 
the net moment M acting on the body. These two vector equations of motion are typically written as a set of 
six x, y, and z component equations.

Euler’s Equations of Motion

Newton’s equations of motion describe the motion of the center of mass of a body. More generally, Euler’s 
equations of motion describe the motion of a rigid body with respect to its center of mass. For the special 
case where the xyz coordinate axes are chosen to coincide with the body’s principal axes,

X M x ¼ I xx a x þ (I zz À I yy )! y ! z

(4:44)

X M y ¼ I yy a y þ (I xx À I zz )! z ! x

(4:45)

X M z ¼ I zz a z þ (I yy À I xx )! x ! y

(4:46)

M i is the net moment, I ii is the body’s moment of inertia with respect to the principal axes, and a i and 
! i are the body’s angular acceleration and angular velocity, respectively. Euler’s equations require 
angular measurements in radians. Their derivation is outside the scope of this chapter, but may be found in 
any intermediate dynamics

book. Equations 4.44–4.46 will be used in Section 4.6 to compute intersegmental or joint moments.

4.3 MECHANICS OF MATERIALS

Just as kinematic and kinetic relations may be applied to biological bodies to describe their motion and its 
associated forces, concepts from mechanics of materials may be used to quantify tissue deformation, to study 
distributed orthopedic forces, and to predict the performance of orthopedic implants and prostheses and of 
surgical corrections. Since this topic is very broad, some representative concepts will be illustrated with 
the following examples.

An orthopedic bone plate is a ﬂat segment of stainless steel used to screw two failed sections of bone 
together. The bone plate in Figure 4.10 has a rectangular cross-section, A, measuring 4.17 mm by 12 mm and 
made of 316L stainless steel. An applied axial load, F, of 500 N produces axial stress, s, (force/area):

F s ¼ A

(4:47)

500 N

¼

¼ 10 MPa (4:17 Â 10 À3 m)(12 Â 10 À3 m)

The maximum shear stress, t max , occurs at a 458 angle to the applied load

F458  t max ¼ A458 

(4:48)

(500 N) cos 458 ¼ ¼ 5 MPa Âcos 458 (0:00417 m)(0:012 m) Ã

which is 0:5s, as expected from mechanics of materials principles. Prior to loading, two points were punched 
15 mm apart on the long axis of the plate, as shown. After the 500 N load is applied, those marks are an 
additional 0.00075 mm apart. The plate’s strain, e, relates the change in length, D‘ to the original length, 
‘:

D‘ e¼ ‘

(4:49)

0:00075 mm ¼ ¼ 50 Â 10À6  often reported as 50 m where m denotes microstrain (10 À6 ).

15 mm

The elastic modulus, E, relates stress and strain and is a measure of a material’s resistance to distortion 
by a tensile or compressive load. For linearly elastic (Hookean) materials, E is a constant, and a plot of s 
as a function of e is a straight line with slope E:

s E¼ e

Â 10 106  Pa E ¼ ¼ 200 GPa 50 Â 10À6 

(4:50)

For the bone plate,

Materials such as metals and plastics display linearly elastic properties only in limited ranges of applied 
loads. Biomaterials have even more complex elastic properties. Figure 4.11 shows tensile stress–strain 
curves measured from longitudinal and transverse sections of bone. Taking the longitudinal curve ﬁrst, from 
0–7000 m bone behaves as a purely elastic solid with E % 12 GPa. At a tensile stress of approximately 90 
MPa, the stress–strain curve becomes nonlinear, yielding into the plastic region of deformation. This sample 
ultimately fails at 120 MPa. Table 4.2 shows elastic moduli, yield stresses, and ultimate stresses for some 
common orthopedic materials, both natural and implant.

Figure 4.11 also shows that the elastic properties of bone differ depending on whether the sample is cut in 
the longitudinal or transverse direction (i.e., bone is anisotropic). Bone is much weaker and less stiff in 
the transverse compared to the longitudinal direction, as is illustrated by the large differences in the 
yield and ultimate stresses and the slopes of the stress–strain curves for the two samples.

Figure 4.12 shows that the elastic properties of bone also vary depending on whether the load is being 
applied or removed, displaying hysteresis. From a thermodynamic view, the energy stored in the bone during 
loading is not equal to the energy released during unloading. This energy difference becomes greater as the 
maximum

load increases (curves A to B to C). The ‘‘missing’’ energy is dissipated as heat due to internal friction 
and damage to the material at high loads.

The anisotropic nature of bone is sufﬁcient that its ultimate stress in compression is 200 MPa while in 
tension it is only 140 MPa and in torsion 75 MPa. For torsional loading the shear modulus or modulus of 
rigidity, denoted G, relates the shear stress to the shear strain. The modulus of rigidity is related to the 
elastic modulus via Poisson’s ratio, n, where

etransverse  n¼ elongitudinal 

(4:51)

Typically, n % 0:3, meaning that longitudinal deformation is three times greater than transverse 
deformation. For linearly elastic materials, E, G, and n are related by

¼

(4:52)

2(1 þ n)

One additional complexity of predicting biomaterial failure is the complexity of physiological loading. For 
example, bone is much stronger in compression than in tension. This property is demonstrated in ‘‘boot-top’’ 
fractures in skiing. Since the foot is ﬁxed, the skier’s forward momentum causes a moment over the ski boot 
top and produces three-point bending of the tibia. In this bending mode the anterior tibia undergoes 
compression, while the posterior is in tension and potentially in failure. Contraction of the triceps surae 
muscle produces high compressive stress at the posterior side, reducing the amount of bone tension. The 
following example shows how topics from statics and mechanics of materials may be applied to biomechanical 
problems.

Example Problem 4.8

Figure 4.13 (left) shows an orthopedic nail-plate used to ﬁx an intertrochanteric fracture. The hip applies 
an external force of 400 N during static standing, as shown. The nail-plate is rectangular stainless steel 
with cross-sectional dimensions of 10 mm (width) by 5 mm (height), and is well ﬁxed with screws along its 
vertical axis and friction ﬁt into the trochanteric head (along the x axis). What forces, moments, 
stresses, and strains will develop in this orthopedic device?

Solution

As for any statics problem, the ﬁrst task is constructing a free-body diagram, including all applied forces 
and moments and all reaction forces and moments that develop at

the supports. Because of the instability at the fracture site the nail-plate may be required to carry the 
entire 400 N load. Consequently, one reasonable model of the nail-plate is a cantilever beam of length 0.06 
m with a combined loading, as depicted in Figure 4.13 (right, top). The applied 400 N load consists of both 
axial and transverse components:

F x ¼ 400 N cos 208 ¼ 376 N

F y ¼ 400 N sin 208 ¼ 137 N

The axial load produces compressive normal stress; from Eq. 4.47,

Fx  sx ¼ A

376 N

¼

¼ 7:52 MPa (0:005 m)(0:01 m)

in compression, which is only about 1% of the yield stress for stainless steel (Table 4.2). The maximum 
shear stress due to the axial load is

sx  tmax ¼ ¼ 3:76 MPa 2

and occurs at 458 from the long axis. The axial strain can be computed using the elastic modulus for 
stainless steel,

s F=A E¼ ¼ e D‘=‘

giving an expression for strain:

F e¼ EA

376 N Â ¼ ¼ 41:8 10À6  180 Â 10 9 Pa (0:005 m)(0:01 m) From this strain the axial deformation can be 
computed:

D‘ axial ¼ e ‘ ¼ 2:51 Â 10 À6 m

which is negligible.

The transverse load causes the cantilever section to bend. The equations describing beam bending can be 
found in any mechanics of materials text (e.g., Roark 1989). Consider the beam in the left panel of Figure 
4.14. If this beam is ﬁxed at the left hand side and subjected to a downward load on the right, it will 
bend with the top of the beam elongating and the bottom shortening. Consequently, the top of the beam is in 
tension and the bottom in compression. The point of transition, where there is no bending force, is denoted 
the neutral axis, located at distance c. For a symmetric rectangular beam of height h, c is located at the 
midline h/2. The beam resists bending via its area moment of inertia I. For a rectangular cross section of 
width b and height h, I ¼ 12 1 bh 3 , depicted in the right panel of Figure 4.14.

Beam tip deﬂection dy is equal to

Fx2  dy ¼ (3L À x) 6EI

(4:53)

where x is the axial distance along the beam, L is the total beam length, and I is the beam’s 
cross-sectional area moment of inertia. For this example,

1 Â I ¼ m)(5 Â 10 À3 m) 3 ¼ 10:42 Â 10 À9 m4  (10 10À3  12

Maximum deﬂection will occur at x ¼ L,

dy max ¼ 3EI

137 N(0:06 m)3  ¼ 3(180 Â 10 9 N=m 2 )(10:42 Â 10 À9 m 4 ) ¼ 5:26 Â 10 À4 m ¼ 0:526 mm

(4:54)

which is also negligible.

Computation of maximum shear and bending stresses require maximum shear force V and bending moment M. 
Starting by static analysis of the entire freebody

X F x : A x À 376 N ¼ 0 X F y : A y À 137 N ¼ 0 X M A : M a À 137 N(0:06 m) ¼ 0

Solving these equations gives A x ¼ 376 N, A y ¼ 137 N, and M a ¼ 8:22 N m. Taking a cut at any point x to 
the right of A and isolating the left-hand section gives the freebody in Figure 4.13 (right, bottom). 
Applying the equations of static equilibrium to this isolated section yields

X F x : 376 N À N ¼ 0

N(x) ¼ 376 N X F y : 137 N À V ¼ 0

V(x) ¼ 137 N X M A : 8:22 N m À (137 N)(x m) þ M ¼ 0

¼ (137 N m) x À 8:22 N m These last equations can be plotted easily using MATLAB, giving the axial force, 
shear force, and bending moment diagrams shown in Figure 4.15.

M(x)

% Use MATLAB to plot axial force, shear force, and bending moment diagrams % for Example Problem 4.8

X ¼ [0:0.01:0.06]; N ¼ x. * 0 + 376; V ¼ x. * 0 + 137; M ¼ 137. * x À 8.22;

ﬁgure subplot (3,1,1), plot(x,N,x,N, ’x’) xlabel (’x [m]’) ylabel(’N [N]’) title (’Axial Force N’)


subplot(3,1,2), plot(x,V,x,V,’x’) xlabel(’x [m]’) ylabel(’V [N]’) title(’Shear Force V’) subplot(3,1,3), 
plot(x,M,x,M,’x’) xlabel(’x [m]’) ylabel(’M [NÀm]’) title (’Bending Moment M’)

The maximum bending and shear stresses follow as

s

bmax

Mmax  ¼ I

c

(4:55)

where c, the distance to the beam’s neutral axis, is h/2 for this beam:

sb max ¼ 10:42 Â 10 À9 m4 

m)]

¼ À197 MPa

Vmax  h2  tb max ¼ 8I

(4:56)

Â 137 N(5 10À3  m)2  ¼ ¼ 4:11 MPa 8(10:42 Â 10 À9 m 4 )

All of these stresses are well below s yield ¼ 700 MPa for stainless steel.

&

4.4 VISCOELASTIC PROPERTIES

The Hookean elastic solid is a valid description of materials only within a narrow loading range. For 
example, an ideal spring that relates force and elongation by a spring constant k is invalid in nonlinear 
low-load and high-load regions. Further, if this spring is coupled to a mass and set into motion, the 
resulting perfect harmonic oscillator will vibrate forever, which experience shows does not occur. Missing 
is a description of the system’s viscous or damping properties. In this case, energy is dissipated as heat 
in the spring and air friction on the moving system.

Similarly, biomaterials all display viscoelastic properties. Different models of viscoelasticity have been 
developed to characterize materials with simple constitutive equations. For example, Figure 4.16 shows three 
such models that consist of a series ideal spring and dashpot (Maxwell), a parallel spring and dashpot 
(Voight), and a series spring and dashpot with a parallel spring (Kelvin). Each body contains a dashpot, 
which generates force in proportion to the derivative of its elongation. Consequently, the resulting models 
exhibit stress and strain properties that vary in time.

The dynamic response of each model can be quantiﬁed by applying a step change in force F and noting the 
model’s resulting change in length, or position x, denoted the creep response. The converse experiment 
applies a step change in x and measures the resulting change in F, denoted stress relaxation. Creep and 
stress relaxation tests for each dynamic model can be carried out easily using the Simulink program. Figure 
4.17 shows a purely elastic material subjected to a step change in applied force F. The material’s 
subsequent position x follows the change in force directly. This material exhibits no creep. Figure 4.18 
shows the purely elastic material subjected to a step change in position x. Again, the material responds 
immediately with a step change in F (i.e., no stress relaxation is observed).

James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) used a series combination of ideal spring and dashpot to describe the 
viscoelastic properties of air. Figure 4.19 shows the Maxwell viscoelastic model subjected to a step change 
in applied force, and Fig. 4.20 shows the Maxwell model’s stress relaxation response. The latter exhibits an 
initial high stress followed by stress relaxation back to the initial stress level. The creep response, 
however, shows that this model is not bounded in displacement since an ideal dashpot may be extended 
forever.

Woldemar Voight (1850–1919) used the parallel combination of an ideal spring and dashpot in his work with 
crystallography. Figure 4.21 shows the creep test of the Voight viscoelastic model. Figure 4.22 shows that 
this model is unbounded in force. That is, when a step change in length is applied, force goes to inﬁnity 
since the dashpot cannot immediately respond to the length change.

William Thompson (Lord Kelvin, 1824–1907) used the three-element viscoelastic model (Figure 4.16c) to 
describe the mechanical properties of different solids in the form of a torsional pendulum. Figure 4.23 
shows the three-element Kelvin model’s creep response. This model has an initial rapid jump in position with 
subsequent slow creep. Figure 4.24 shows the Kelvin model stress relaxation test. Initially, the material is 
very stiff with subsequent stress decay to a non zero steady-state level that is due to the extension of the 
dashpot. The three-element Kelvin model is the simplest lumped viscoelastic model that is bounded both in 
extension and force.

The three-element viscoelastic model describes the basic features of stress relaxation and creep. Biological 
materials often exhibit more complex viscoelastic properties. For example, plotting hysteresis as a function 
of frequency of applied strain gives

discrete curves for the lumped viscoelastic models. Biological tissues demonstrate broad, distributed 
hysteresis properties. One solution is to describe biomaterials with a distributed network of three-element 
models. A second method is to use the generalized viscoelastic model of Westerhof and Noordergraaf (1990) to 
describe the viscoelastic wall properties of blood vessels. Making the elastic modulus (mathematically) 
complex yields a model that includes the frequency dependent elastic modulus, stress relaxation, creep, and 
hysteresis exhibited by arteries. Further, the Voight and Maxwell models emerge as special (limited) cases 
of this general approach.

4.5 CARTILAGE, LIGAMENT, TENDON, AND MUSCLE

The articulating surfaces of bones are covered with articular cartilage, a biomaterial composed mainly of 
collagen. Collagen is the main structural material of hard and

soft tissues in animals. Isolated collagen ﬁbers have high tensile strength that is comparable to nylon 
(50–100 MPa) and an elastic modulus of approximately 1 GPa. Elastin is a protein found in vertebrates and is 
particularly important in blood vessels and the lungs. Elastin is the most linearly elastic biosolid known, 
with an elastic modulus of approximately 0.6 MPa. It gives skin and connective tissue their elasticity.

4.5.1 Cartilage

Cartilage serves as the bearing surfaces of joints. It is porous and its complex mechanical properties arise 
from the motion of ﬂuid in and out of the tissue when subjected to joint loading. Consequently, articular 
cartilage is strongly viscoelastic with stress relaxation times in compression on the order of 1 to 5 
seconds. Cartilage is anisotropic and displays hysteresis during cyclical loading. Ultimate compressive 
stress of cartilage is on the order of 5 MPa.


4.5.2 Ligaments and Tendons

Ligaments join bones together and consequently serve as part of the skeletal framework. Tendons join muscles 
to bones and transmit forces generated by contracting muscles to cause movement of the jointed limbs. 
Tendons and ligaments primarily transmit tension; hence they are composed mainly of parallel bundles of 
collagen ﬁbers and have similar mechanical properties. Human tendon has an ultimate stress of

50–100 MPa and exhibits very nonlinear stress–strain curves. The middle stressstrain range is linear with an 
elastic modulus of approximately 1–2 GPa. Both tendons and ligaments exhibit hysteresis, viscoelastic creep, 
and stress relaxation. These materials may also be ‘‘preconditioned,’’ whereby initial tensile loading can 
affect subsequent load-deformation curves. The material properties shift due to changes in the internal 
tissue structure with repeated loading.

4.5.3 Muscle Mechanics

Chapter 3 introduced muscle as an active, excitable tissue that generates force by forming cross-bridge 
bonds between the interdigitating actin and myosin myoﬁlaments. The quantitative description of muscle 
contraction has evolved into two separate foci—lumped descriptions based on A. V. Hill’s contractile 
element, and cross-bridge models based on A.F. Huxley’s description of a single sarcomere (Palladino and 
Noordergraaf, 1998). The earliest quantitative descriptions of muscle are lumped whole muscle models with 
the simplest mechanical description being a purely elastic spring. Potential energy is stored when the 
spring is stretched, and shortening occurs when it is released. The idea of muscle elastance can be traced 
back to Ernst Weber (1846) who considered muscle as an elastic material that changes state during activation 
via conversion of chemical energy. Subsequently, investigators retained the elastic description but ignored 
metabolic alteration of muscle stiffness. A purely elastic model of muscle can be refuted on thermodynamic 
grounds since the potential energy stored during stretching is less than the sum of the energy released 
during shortening as work and heat. Still, efforts to describe muscle by a combination of traditional 
springs and dashpots continued. In 1922, Hill coupled the spring with a viscous medium, thereby 
reintroducing viscoelastic muscle descriptions that can be traced back to the 1840s.

Quick stretch and release experiments show that muscle’s viscoelastic properties are strongly time 
dependent. In general, the faster a change in muscle length occurs, the more severely the contractile force 
is disturbed. Muscle contraction clearly arises from a more sophisticated mechanism than a damped elastic 
spring. In 1935, Fenn and Marsh added a series elastic element to Hill’s damped elastic model and concluded 
that ‘‘muscle cannot properly be treated as a simple mechanical system.’’ Subsequently, Hill embodied the 
empirical hyperbolic relation between load and initial velocity of shortening for skeletal muscle as a model 
building block, denoted the contractile element. Hill’s previous viscoelastic model considered muscle to 
possess a ﬁxed amount of potential energy whose rate of release is controlled by viscosity. Energy is now 
thought to be controlled by some undeﬁned internal mechanism rather than by friction. This new feature of 
muscle dynamics varying with load was a step in the right direction; however, subsequent models, including 
heart studies, built models based essentially on the hyperbolic curve that was measured for tetanized 
skeletal muscle. This approach can be criticized on two grounds, (1) embodiment of the contractile element 
by a single force-velocity relation sets a single, ﬁxed relation between muscle energetics and force, and 
(2) it yields no information on the contractile mechanism behind this relation. Failure of the contractile 
element to describe

a particular loading condition led investigators to add passive springs and dashpots liberally with the 
number of elements reaching at least nine by the late 1960s. Distributed models of muscle contraction, to 
date, have been conservative in design and have depended fundamentally on the Hill contractile element. 
Recent models are limited to tetanized, isometric contractions or to isometric twitch contractions.

A second, independent focus of muscle contraction research works at the ultrastructural level with the 
sliding ﬁlament theory serving as the most widely accepted contraction mechanism. Muscle force generation 
is viewed as the result of crossbridge bonds formed between thick and thin ﬁlaments at the expense of 
biochemical energy. The details of bond formation and detachment are under considerable debate, with the 
mechanism for relaxation particularly uncertain. Prior to actual observation of cross-bridges, A. F. Huxley 
(1957) devised the cross-bridge model based on structural and energetic assumptions. Bonds between 
myoﬁlaments are controlled via rate constants f and g that dictate attachment and detachment, respectively. 
One major shortcoming of this idea was the inability to describe transients resulting from rapid changes in 
muscle length or load, similar to the creep and stress relaxation tests previously discussed.

Subsequent models adopt increasingly complex bond attachment and detachment rate functions and are often 
limited in scope to description of a single pair of myoﬁlaments. Each tends to focus on description of a 
single type of experiment (e.g., quick release). No model has been shown to broadly describe all types of 
contractile loading conditions. Cross-bridge models have tended to rely on increasingly complex bond 
attachment and detachment rate functions. This trend has reversed the issue of describing complex muscle 
dynamics from the underlying (simpler) cross-bridges to adopting complex cross-bridge dynamics to describe a 
particular experiment.

Alternatively, Palladino and Noordergraaf (1998) proposed a large-scale, distributed muscle model that 
manifests both contraction and relaxation as the result of fundamental mechanical properties of cross-bridge 
bonds. As such, muscle’s complex contractile properties emerge from the underlying ultrastructure dynamics 
(i.e., function follows from structure). Bonds between myoﬁlaments, which are biomaterials, are described 
as viscoelastic material. The initial stimulus for contraction is electrical. Electrical propagation through 
cardiac muscle occurs at ﬁnite speed, implying spatial asynchrony of stimulation. Furthermore, Ca þþ 
release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum depends on diffusion for availability at the myosin heads. These 
effects, as well as nonuniformity of structure, strongly suggest that contraction is asynchronous throughout 
the muscle. Recognition of muscle’s distributed properties by abandoning the assumption of perfect synchrony 
in contraction and consideration of myoﬁlament mass allow for small movements of thick with respect to thin 
ﬁlaments. Such movements lead to bond detachment and heat production. Gross movement (e.g., muscle 
shortening) exacerbates this process. Quick transients in muscle length or applied load have particularly 
strong effects and have been observed experimentally. Muscle relaxation is thereby viewed as a consequence 
of muscle’s distributed properties.

The new distributed muscle model is built from the following main features: sarcomeres consist of 
overlapping thick and thin ﬁlaments connected by cross-bridge

bonds which form during activation and detach during relaxation. Figure 4.25 shows a schematic of a muscle 
ﬁber (cell) comprised of a string of series sarcomeres. Crossbridge bonds are each described as 
three-element viscoelastic solids, and myoﬁlaments as masses. Force is generated due to viscoelastic 
cross-bridge bonds that form and are stretched between the interdigitating matrix of myoﬁlaments. The 
number of bonds formed depends on the degree of overlap between thick and thin ﬁlaments and is dictated 
spatially and temporally due to ﬁnite electrical and chemical activation rates. Asynchrony in bond 
formation and unequal numbers of bonds formed in each half sarcomere, as well as mechanical disturbances 
such as muscle shortening and imposed length transients, cause small movements of the myoﬁlaments. Since 
myoﬁlament masses are taken into account, these movements take the form of damped vibrations with a 
spectrum of frequencies due to the distributed system properties. When the stress in a bond goes to zero, 
the bond detaches. Consequently, myoﬁlament motion and bond stress relaxation lead to bond detachment and 
produce relaxation without assumption of bond detachment rate functions. In essence, relaxation results from 
inherent system instability. Although the model is built from linear, time-invariant components (springs, 
dashpots, and masses), the highly dynamic structure of the model causes its mechanical properties to be 
highly nonlinear and timevarying, as is found in muscle ﬁbers and strips.

Sensitivity of the model to mechanical disturbances is consistent with experimental evidence from muscle 
force traces, aequorin measurements of free calcium ion, and high speed X-ray diffraction studies which all 
suggest enhanced bond detachment. The model is also consistent with sarcomere length feedback studies in 
which reduced

internal motion delays relaxation, and it predicted muscle ﬁber (cell) dynamics prior to their experimental 
measurement.

This model proposes a structural mechanism for the origin of muscle’s complex mechanical properties and 
predicts new features of the contractile mechanism (e.g., a mechanism for muscle relaxation and prediction 
of muscle heat generation). This new approach computes muscle’s complex mechanical properties from physical 
description of muscle anatomical structure, thereby linking subcellular structure to organlevel function.

This chapter describes some of the high points of biological tissues’ mechanical properties. More 
comprehensive references include Fung’s Biomechanics: Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues, Nigg and 
Herzog’s Biomechanics of the Musculo-Skeletal System, and Mow and Hayes’ Basic Orthopaedic Biomechanics. 
Muscle contraction research has a long history, as chronicled in the book Machina Carnis by Needham. For a 
more comprehensive history of medicine see Singer and Underwood’s (1962) book. The next two sections apply 
biomechanics concepts introduced in Sections 4.2–4.5 to human gait analysis and to the quantitative study of 
the cardiovascular system.

4.6 CLINICAL GAIT ANALYSIS

An example of applied dynamics in human movement analysis is clinical gait analysis. Clinical gait analysis 
involves the measurement of the parameters that characterize a patient’s gait pattern, the interpretation of 
the collected and processed data, and the recommendation of treatment alternatives. It is a highly 
collaborative process that requires the cooperation of the patient and the expertise of a multidisciplinary 
team that typically includes a physician, a physical therapist or kinesiologist, and an engineer or 
technician. The engineer is presented with a number of challenges. The fundamental objective in data 
collection is to monitor the patient’s movements accurately and with sufﬁcient precision for clinical use 
without altering the patient’s typical performance. While measurement devices for clinical gait analysis are 
established to some degree (i.e., commercially available) the protocols for the use of the equipment 
continue to develop. The validity of these protocols and associated models and the care with which they are 
applied ultimately dictate the meaning and quality of the resulting data provided for interpretation. This 
is one area in which engineers in collaboration with their clinical partners can have a signiﬁcant impact 
on the clinical gait analysis process.

Generally, data collection for clinical gait analysis involves the placement of highly reﬂective markers on 
the surface of the patient’s skin. These external markers then reﬂect light to an array of video-based 
motion cameras that surround the measurement volume. The instantaneous location of each of these markers can 
then be determined stereometrically based on the images obtained simultaneously from two or more cameras. 
Other aspects of gait can be monitored as well, including ground reactions via force platforms embedded in 
the walkway and muscle activity via electromyography with either surface or intramuscular ﬁne wire 
electrodes, depending on the location of the particular muscle.

In keeping with the other material presented in this chapter, the focus of this section will pertain to the 
biomechanical aspects of clinical gait analysis and includes an outline of the computation of segmental and 
joint kinematics and joint kinetics and a brief illustration of how the data are interpreted.

4.6.1 The Clinical Gait Model

The gait model is the algorithm that transforms the data collected during walking trials into the 
information required for clinical interpretation. For example, the gait model uses the data associated with 
the three-dimensional displacement of the markers on the patient to compute the angles that describe how the 
patient’s body segment and lower extremity joints are moving. The design of the gait model is predicated on 
a clear understanding of the needs of the clinical interpretation team (e.g., the speciﬁc aspects of gait 
dynamics of interest). To meet these clinical speciﬁcations, gait model development is constrained both by 
the technical limitations of the measurement system and by the broad goal of developing protocols that may 
be appropriate for a wide range of patient populations that vary in age, gait abnormality, walking ability, 
etc. An acceptable model must be sufﬁciently general to be used for many different types of patients (e.g., 
adults and children with varying physical and cognitive involvement), be sufﬁciently sophisticated to allow 
detailed biomechanical questions to be addressed, and be based on repeatable protocols that are feasible in 
a clinical setting.

4.6.2 Kinematic Data Analysis

Reﬂective markers placed on the surface of the patient’s skin are monitored or tracked in space and time by 
a system of video-based cameras. These marker trajectories are used to compute coordinate systems that are 
anatomically aligned and embedded in each body segment under analysis. These anatomical coordinate systems 
provide the basis for computing the absolute spatial orientation (or attitude) of the body segment or the 
angular displacement of one segment relative to another (e.g., joint angles). For this analysis, at least 
three non-colinear markers or points of reference must be placed on or identiﬁed for each body segment 
included in the analysis. These markers form a plane from which a segmentally ﬁxed coordinate system may be 
derived. Any three markers will allow the segment motion to be monitored, but unless these markers are 
referenced to the subject’s anatomy, such kinematic quantiﬁcation is of limited clinical value. Markers 
must either be placed directly over palpable bony landmarks on the segment or at convenient (i.e., visible 
to the measurement cameras) locations on the segment that are referenced to the underlying bone(s). An 
examination of the pelvic and thigh segments illustrates these two alternatives.

Pelvic Anatomical Coordinate System

For the pelvis, markers placed over the right and left anterior–superior–iliac–spine (ASIS) and either the 
right or left posterior–superior–iliac–spine (PSIS) will allow for

the computation of an anatomically aligned coordinate system, as described in the following example.

Example Problem 4.9

Given the following three-dimensional locations in meters for a set of pelvic markers expressed relative to 
an inertially ﬁxed laboratory coordinate system (Figure 4.26),

Right ASIS : RASIS ¼ À0:850i À 0:802j þ 0:652k Left ASIS : LASIS ¼ À0:831i À 0:651j þ 0:652k

PSIS ¼ À1:015i À 0:704j þ 0:686k compute an anatomical coordinate system for the pelvis.

Solution

These three anatomical markers form a plane. The line between the right ASIS and left 
ASISrepresentsonecoordinatesystemaxis.Anothercoordinateaxisisperpendicularto the pelvicplane.The third 
coordinateaxisis computedto beorthogonalto theﬁrst two:

1. Subtract vector RASIS from vector LASIS, LASIS À RASIS ¼ (À0:831 À (À0:850))i þ (À0:651 À (À0:802))j þ 
(0:652 À 0:652)k to ﬁnd r 1 ¼ 0:0190i þ 0:1510j þ 0:0000k and its associated unit vector:

0:019i þ 0:151j þ 0:000k e r1 ¼ 
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 
0:019 2 þ 0:151 2 þ 0:0002  e r1 ¼ 0:125i þ 0:992j þ 0:000k

Unit vector e r1 represents the medial–lateral direction or y axis for the pelvic anatomical coordinate 
system e pay (Fig. 4.26).

2. A second vector in the pelvic plane is required to compute the coordinate axis that is perpendicular to 
the plane. Consequently, subtract vector RASIS from vector PSIS to ﬁnd r 2 ¼ À0:165i þ 0:098j þ 0:034k

3. Take the vector cross product e pay Â r 2 to yield  i j k      r 3 ¼  0:125 0:992 0:000     À0:165 0:098 
0:034    ¼ [(0:992)(0:034)À(0:000)(0:098)]i þ [(0:000)(À0:165)À(0:125)(0:034)]j þ 
[(0:125)(0:098)À(0:992)(À0:165)]k ¼ 0:034iÀ0:004j þ 0:176k and its associated unit vector:

e r3 ¼ e paz ¼ 0:188i À 0:024j þ 0:982k Unit vector e r3 represents the anterior–superior direction or z 
axis of the pelvic anatomical coordinate system e paz (Fig. 4.26).

4. The third coordinate axis is computed to be orthogonal to the ﬁrst two. Take the vector cross product e 
pay Â e paz to compute the fore–aft direction, or x axis, of the pelvic anatomical coordinate system: e pax 
¼ 0:974i À 0:123j À 0:190k For this example, the anatomical coordinate system for the pelvis can be 
expressed as follows:

2

4

{e pa } ¼

epax  epay  epaz 

3 2 5 ¼ 4

32

54

3

0:974 0:125 0:188

À0:123 0:992 À0:024

À0:190 0:000 0:982

i j k

5

Note that the coefﬁcients associated with these three axes represent the direction cosines that deﬁne the 
orientation of the pelvic coordinate system relative to the laboratory coordinate system. & In summary, by 
monitoring the motion of the three pelvic markers, the instantaneous orientation of an anatomical coordinate 
system for the pelvis, {e pa }, comprised of axes e pax , e pay , and e paz , can be determined. The 
absolute angular displacement of this coordinate system can then be computed via Euler angles as pelvic 
tilt, obliquity, and rotation using Eqs. 4.32–4.34. An example of these angle computations is presented 
later in this section.

Thigh Anatomical Coordinate System

The thigh presents a more signiﬁcant challenge than the pelvis since three bony anatomical landmarks are 
not readily available as reference points during gait. A model based on markers placed over the medial and 
lateral femoral condyles and the greater trochanter is appealing but plagued with difﬁculties. A marker 
placed over the medial femoral condyle is not always feasible during gait (e.g., with patients whose knees 
make contact while walking). A marker placed over the greater trochanter is often described in the 
literature but should not be used as a reference because of its signiﬁcant movement relative to the 
underlying greater trochanter during gait (skin motion artifact).

In general, the approach used to quantify thigh motion (and the shank and foot) is to place additional 
anatomical markers on the segment(s) during a static subject calibration process so that the relationship 
between these static anatomical markers (that are removed before gait data collection) and the motion 
markers (that remain on the patient during gait data collection) may be calculated. It is assumed that this 
mathematical relationship remains constant during gait (i.e., the instrumented body segments are assumed to 
be rigid). This process is illustrated in the following example.

Example Problem 4.10

Given the following marker coordinate data that have been acquired while the patient stands quietly (also in 
meters),

lateral femoral condyle marker LK ¼ À0:881i À 0:858j þ 0:325k

medial femoral condyle marker MK ¼ À0:855i À 0:767j þ 0:318k

compute an anatomical coordinate system for the thigh.

Solution

A thigh plane is formed based on three anatomical markers or points: the hip center, the lateral femoral 
condyle marker LK, and the medial femoral condyle marker MK.

The knee center location can then be estimated as the midpoint between LK and MK. With these points, the 
vector from the knee center to the hip center represents the longitudinal axis of the coordinate system. A 
second coordinate axis is perpendicular to the thigh plane. The third coordinate axis is computed to be 
orthogonal to the ﬁrst two.

The location of the knee center of rotation may be approximated as the midpoint between the medial and 
lateral femoral condyle markers,

LK þ MK

2

(À0:881) þ (À0:855) (À0:858) þ (À0:767) ¼ i þ j 2 2

(0:325) þ (0:318) þ

k

2

yielding

knee center location K ¼ À0:868i À 0:812j þ 0:321k

The location of the center of the head of the femur, referred to as the hip center, is commonly used in this 
calculation by approximating its location based on patient anthropometry and a statistical model of pelvic 
geometry that is beyond the scope of this chapter. In this case, it can be located at approximately (Davis 
et al., 1991)

hip center location H ¼ À0:906i À 0:763j þ 0:593k

Now the anatomical coordinate system for the thigh may be computed as follows.

1. Subtract the vector K from H, giving

r 4 ¼ À0:038i þ 0:049j þ 0:272k and its associated unit vector

e r4 ¼ e taz ¼ À0:137i þ 0:175j þ 0:975k Unit vector e r4 represents the longitudinal direction, or z axis, 
of the thigh anatomical coordinate system e taz .

2. As with the pelvis, a second vector in the thigh plane is required to compute the coordinate axis that is 
perpendicular to the plane. Consequently, subtract vector LK from MK:

r 5 ¼ 0:026i þ 0:091j À 0:007k 3. Form the vector cross product r 5 Â e taz to yield

r 6 ¼ 0:090i À 0:024j þ 0:017k and its associated unit vector

e r6 ¼ e tax ¼ 0:949i À 0:258j þ 0:180k Unit vector e r6 represents the fore–aft direction, or x axis, of 
the thigh anatomical coordinate system e tax .

4. Again, the third coordinate axis is computed to be orthogonal to the ﬁrst two.

Determine the medial–lateral or y axis of the thigh anatomical coordinate system, e tay , from the cross 
product e taz Â e tax :

e tay ¼ 0:284i þ 0:950j À 0:131k

For this example, the anatomical coordinate system for the thigh can be expressed as 2 3 2 32 3 e tax 0:949 
À0:258 0:180 i {e ta } ¼ 4 e tay 5 ¼ 4 0:284 0:950 À0:131 54 j 5 e taz À0:137 0:175 0:975 k

This deﬁnes an anatomical coordinate system ﬁxed to the thigh, {e ta }, comprised of axes e tax , e tay , 
and e taz . Its basis, however, includes an external marker (medial femoral condyle MK) that must be removed 
before the walking trials. Consequently, the location of the knee center cannot be computed as described in 
the preceeding example. This dilemma is resolved by placing another marker on the surface of the thigh such 
that it also forms a plane with the hip center and lateral knee marker. These three reference points can 
then be used to compute a ‘‘technical’’ coordinate system for the thigh to which the knee center location 
may be mathematically referenced.&

Example Problem 4.11

Continuing Example Problem 4.10, and given the coordinates of another marker placed on the thigh but not 
anatomically aligned,

thigh wand marker TW ¼ À0:890i À 0:937j þ 0:478k

compute a technical coordinate system for the thigh.

Solution

A technical coordinate system for the thigh can be computed as follows.

1. Compute the longitudinal direction, or z axis, of the technical thigh coordinate system e tt . Start by 
subtracting vector LK from the hip center H to form

r 7 ¼ À0:025i þ 0:094j þ 0:268k

and its associated unit vector

e r7 ¼ e ttz ¼ À0:088i þ 0:330j þ 0:940k

Unit vector e r7 represents the z axis of the thigh technical coordinate system, e ttz .

2. To compute the axis that is perpendicular to the plane formed by LK, H and TW, subtract vector LK from TW 
to compute

r 8 ¼ À0:009i À 0:079j þ 0:153k

3. Calculate the vector cross product r 7 Â r 8 to yield

r 9 ¼ 0:036i þ 0:001j þ 0:003k

with its associated unit vector

e r9 ¼ e ttx ¼ 0:996i þ 0:040j þ 0:079k

Unit vector e r9 represents the fore–aft direction, or x axis, of the thigh technical coordinate system e 
ttx .

4. The third coordinate axis is computed to be orthogonal to the ﬁrst two axes.

Compute the vector cross product e ttz Â e ttx to determine the media–lateral direction, or y axis, of the 
thigh technical coordinate system:

e tty ¼ À0:012i þ 0:943j þ 0:333k

Forthisexample,thetechnicalcoordinatesystemforthethighcanbeexpressedas 2 3 2 32 3 e ttx 0:996 0:040 0:079 i 
{e tt } ¼ 4 e tty 5 ¼ 4 À0:012 0:943 0:333 54 j 5 e ttz À0:088 0:330 0:940 k Note that this thigh technical 
coordinate system {e tt } computed during the standing subject calibration can also be computed after each 
walking trial. That is, its computation is based on markers (the lateral femoral condyle and thigh wand 
markers) and an anatomical landmark (the hip center) that are available for both the standing and walking 
trials. Consequently, the technical coordinate system {e tt } becomes the embedded reference coordinate 
system to which other entities can be related. The thigh anatomical coordinate system {e ta } can be related 
to the thigh technical coordinate system {e tt } by using either direction cosines or Euler angles as 
described in Section 4.2.2. Also, the location of markers that must be removed after the standing subject 
calibration (e.g., the medial femoral condyle marker MK), or computed anatomical locations (e.g., the knee 
center), can be transformed into the technical coordinate system {e tt } and later retrieved for use in 
walking trial data reduction. &

Segment and Joint Angles

Tracking the anatomical coordinate system for each segment allows for the determination of either the 
absolute angular orientation (or attitude) of each segment in space or the angular position of one segment 
relative to another. In the preceding example, the three pelvic angles that deﬁne the position of the 
pelvic anatomical coordinate system {e pa } relative to the laboratory (inertially ﬁxed) coordinate system 
can be computed from the Euler angles as described in Section 4.2.2 with Eqs. 4.32–4.34. Note that in these 
equations the laboratory coordinate system represents the proximal (unprimed) coordinate system and the 
pelvic anatomical coordinate system {e pa } represents the distal (triple primed) coordinate system. 
Consequently, Eq. 4.32

u x ¼ Àarcsin(k 000 Á j)

becomes

u x ¼ Àarcsin(e paz Á j)

¼ Àarcsin((0:188i À 0:024j þ 0:982k) Á j) ¼ Àarcsin(À0:024) ¼ 1  of pelvic obliquity

Similarly, Eq. 4.33

000 (k Á i) u y ¼ arcsin  cos u x 

becomes

(e Á i) paz u y ¼ arcsin  cos u x 

(0:188i À 0:024j þ 0:982k) Á i ¼ arcsin  cos 1 



0:188 ¼ arcsin  cos 1  

¼ 11  of anterior pelvic tilt

and Eq. 4.34

000 (i Á j) u z ¼ arcsin  cos u x 

becomes

(e Á j) pax u z ¼ arcsin  cos u x 

(0:974i À 0:123j À 0:190k) Á j ¼ arcsin  cos 1 



À0:123 ¼ arcsin  cos 1  

¼ À7  of pelvic rotation

This Euler angle computation may be repeated to solve for the three hip angles that deﬁne the position of 
the thigh anatomical coordinate system {e ta } relative to the pelvic anatomical coordinate system {e pa }. 
For the hip angles, the proximal (unprimed) coordinate system is the pelvis and the distal (triple-primed) 
coordinate system is the thigh. Substituting the values of {e pa } and {e ta } from Example Problems 4.9 and 
4.10 into Eq. 4.32 yields:

u x ¼ Àarcsin(e taz Á e pay )

¼ Àarcsin((À0:137i þ 0:175j þ 0:975k) Á (0:125i þ 0:992j þ 0:000k)) ¼ Àarcsin(0:156) ¼ À9  of hip 
abduction--adduction

The negative sign is associated with hip adduction of the left thigh or hip abduction of the right thigh.

Further substitution of values of {e pa } and {e ta } into Eqs. 4.33 and 4.34 yields

hip flexion--extension u y ¼ 20 

hip internal--external rotation u z ¼ À8 

For hip internal–external rotation, the negative sign is associated with hip internal rotation of the left 
thigh or hip external rotation of the right thigh. A negative hip ﬂexion–extension angle corresponds to hip 
extension, independent of side. This process may be repeated for other body segments such as the shank (or 
lower leg), foot, trunk, arms, and head with the availability of properly deﬁned anatomical coordinate 
systems.

4.6.3 Kinetic Data Analysis

The marker displacement or motion data provide an opportunity to appreciate segment and joint kinematics. 
Kinematic data can be combined with ground reaction data (i.e., forces and torque) and their points of 
application, referred to as the centers of pressure. Combined with estimates of segment mass and mass 
moments of inertia, the net joint reactions (i.e., joint forces and moments) may then be computed.

To illustrate the details of this computational process, consider the following determination of the 
reactions at the ankle (Fig. 4.27) for an individual with mass of 25.2 kg. Data for one instant in the gait 
cycle are shown in the following table.

Anthropomorphic relationships presented in Table 4.1 are used to estimate the mass and mass moments of 
inertia of the foot as well as the location of its center of gravity. The mass of the foot, m foot , may be 
estimated to be 1.45% of the body mass, or 0.365 kg, and the location of the center of gravity is 
approximated as 50% of the foot length. The length of the foot ‘ foot may be approximated as the distance 
between the ankle center and the toe marker, determined as follows:

T À A ¼ (0:421 À 0:357)i þ (0:819 À 0:823)j þ (0:051 À 0:056)k ¼ 0:064i À 0:004j À 0:005k ‘ foot ¼ jT À Aj 
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 
¼ (0:064) 2 þ (À0:004) 2 þ (À0:005) 2 ¼ 0:064 m

Then the location of the center of gravity can be determined relative to the ankle center as

‘foot  (T À A) A þ ¼ (0:357i 0:823j 0:056k) þ þ þ 2 jT À Aj

giving the location of the center of gravity:

0:064

2

!

!

0:064i À 0:004j À 0:005k

0:064

CG ¼ 0:389i þ 0:821j þ 0:054k

which allows computation of position vectors r 1 and r 2 (Fig. 4.27). With a foot length of 0.064 m, a foot 
mass of 0.365 kg, and a proximal radius of gyration per segment length of 0.690, the mass moment of inertia 
relative to the ankle center may be estimated with Eq. 4.40 as

I foot=ankle ¼ (0:365 kg)[(0:690)(0:064 m)]2 

¼ 7:12 Â 10 À4 kg m2 

The centroidal mass moment of inertia, located at the foot’s center of mass, may then be estimated using the 
parallel axis theorem (Eq. 4.41):

I foot=cm ¼Ifoot=ankle Àmfoot d2 

Note that the center of mass is equivalent to the center of gravity in a uniform gravitational ﬁeld. In 
this case, d is the distance between the foot’s center of mass and the ankle. Table 4.1 shows the ratio of 
the foot center of mass location relative to its proximal end to be 0.5, so d ¼ 0:5(‘ foot ) ¼ 0:032 m. 
Therefore,

I foot=cm ¼ (7:12 Â 10 À4 kg m 2 ) À (0:365 kg)(0:032 m)2  ¼ 3:38 Â 10 À4 kg m2 

I foot=cm represents the centroidal mass moment of inertia about the transverse principal axes of the foot 
(y 0 and z 0 in Fig. 4.27). Consequently,

I y 0 y 0 ¼ 3:38 Â 10 À4 kg m2  I z 0 z 0 ¼ 3:38 Â 10 À4 kg m2 

The foot is approximated as a cylinder with a length to radius ratio of 6. The ratio of transverse to 
longitudinal (x 0 ) mass moments of inertia can be shown to be approximately 6.5. Then the longitudinal mass 
moment of inertia (about x 0 in Fig. 4.27) may be estimated as

I x 0 x 0 ¼ 5:20 Â 10 À5 kg m2  Having estimated the anthropomorphic values for the foot, the kinetic 
analysis may now begin. The unknown ankle reaction force, F A , may be found by using Newton’s Second Law, 
or S F ¼ ma:

F g þ F A À m foot gk ¼ m foot afoot 

F A ¼ m foot a foot À F g þ m foot gk

¼ (0:365 kg)[2:09i À 0:357j À 0:266k] m=s

À (3:94i À 15:21j þ 242:4k) N þ (0:365 kg)(9:81 m=s 2 )k ¼ À3:18i þ 15:08j À 238:9k N

Euler’s equations of motion (Eqs. 4.44–4.46) are then applied to determine the unknown ankle moment reaction 
M A . Euler’s equations are deﬁned relative to the principal axes ﬁxed to the segment (i.e., x 0 , y 0 , 
and z 0 ﬁxed to the foot). It is noted, however, that the data required for the solution presented 
previously (e.g., v foot and a foot ) are expressed relative to the laboratory coordinate system (x, y, z). 
Consequently, vectors required for the solution of Euler’s equations must ﬁrst be transformed into the foot 
coordinate system. In the preceding data set, the foot anatomical coordinate system was given as

e fax ¼ 0:977i À 0:0624j À 0:202k e fay ¼ 0:0815i þ 0:993j þ 0:0877k e faz ¼ 0:195i À 0:102j þ 0:975k

where e fax , e fay , and e faz correspond to x 0 , y 0 , and z 0 , or i 0 , j0 , and k 0 . Recall from the 
discussion in Section 4.2.2 that coefﬁcients in the expression for e fax represent the cosines of the 
angles between x 0 and x, x 0 and y, and x 0 and z, respectively. Similarly, the coefﬁcients in the 
expression for e fay represent the cosines of the angles between y0  and x, y 0 and y, and y 0 and z, and 
the coefﬁcients in the expression for e faz represent the cosines of the angles between z 0 and x, z 0 and 
y, and z 0 and z. Consequently, these relationships can be transposed as

i ¼ 0:977i 0 þ 0:0815j 0 þ 0:195k0  j ¼ À0:0624i 0 þ 0:993j 0 À 0:102k0  k ¼ À0:202i 0 þ 0:0877j 0 þ 0:975k0 

In this form, these relationships can be used to transform vectors expressed in terms of lab coordinates:

A ¼ Ax i þ Ay j þ Az k

into foot coordinates:

A ¼ Ax i 0 þ Ay j 0 þ Az k0 

To demonstrate this process, consider the foot angular velocity vector

v foot ¼ 0:042i þ 2:22j À 0:585k rad=s

Substituting the relationships for the lab coordinate system in terms of the foot coordinate system v foot 
becomes,

v foot ¼ 0:042(0:977i 0 þ 0:0815j 0 þ 0:195k 0 )

þ 2:22(À0:0624i0  À 0:585(À0:202i0 

þ þ

0:993j 0 À 0:102k 0 )

0:0877j0 

þ

0:975k 0 )

¼ 0:0210i 0 þ 2:16j 0 À 0:789k 0 rad=s

In a similar manner, the other vectors required for the computation are transformed into the foot coordinate 
system:

r 1 ¼ À0:032i þ 0:002j þ 0:002k ¼ À0:032i 0 À 0:004k 0 m r 2 ¼ 0:033i À 0:005j À 0:054k

¼ 0:0435i 0 À 0:007j 0 À 0:0457k 0 m F g ¼ 3:94i À 15:21j þ 242:36k

¼ À44:16i 0 þ 6:47j 0 þ 238:62k 0 N T g ¼ 0:995k

¼ À0:201i 0 þ 0:0873j 0 þ 0:970k 0 N m F A ¼ À3:18i þ 15:1j À 239k

¼ 44:2i 0 À 6:23j 0 À 235k 0 N

v foot ¼ 0:0420i þ 2:22j À 0:585k

¼ 0:021i 0 þ 2:16j 0 À 0:789k 0 rad=s

a foot ¼ À0:937i þ 8:85j À 5:16k

¼ À0:425i 0 þ 8:26j 0 À 6:116k 0 rad=s2 

Expanding Euler’s equations of motion (Eqs. 4.44–4.46),

M Ax 0 þ (r 1 Â F A ) x 0 þ (r 2 Â F g ) x 0 þ T gx 0 ¼ I x 0 x 0 a x 0 þ (I z 0 z 0 À I y 0 y 0 )v y 0 vz 0 

M Ay 0 þ (r 1 Â F A ) y 0 þ (r 2 Â F g ) y 0 þ T gy 0 ¼ I y 0 y 0 a y 0 þ (I x 0 x 0 À I z 0 z 0 )v z 0 vx 0 

M Az 0 þ (r 1 Â F A ) z 0 þ (r 2 Â F g ) z 0 þ T gz 0 ¼ I z 0 z 0 a z 0 þ (I y 0 y 0 À I x 0 x 0 )v x 0 vy 0 

where (r 1 Â F A ) x 0 represents the x 0 component of r 1 Â F A , (r 2 Â F g ) x 0 represents the x0  
component of r 2 Â Fg , and so forth.

Substitution of the required values and arithmetic reduction yields

M A 0 ¼ 1:50i 0 þ 15:9j 0 À 1:16k 0 Nm

which can be transformed back into ﬁxed lab coordinates,

M A ¼ 2:54i þ 15:9j À 0:037k Nm

By combining the ankle moment with the ankle angular velocity, the instantaneous ankle power may be computed 
as

M A Á v ankle ¼ (2:54i þ 15:9j À 0:037k Nm) Á ( À0:000759i þ 1:47j þ 0:0106k rad=s) ¼ 23:3 Watts

or

M A 0 Á v ankle 0 ¼ (1:50i 0 þ 15:9j 0 À 1:16k 0 Nm) Á ( À0:0946i 0 þ 1:46j 0 À 0:140k 0 rad=s)

¼ 23:3 Watts

which is thought to represent a quantitative measure of the ankle’s contribution to propulsion.

4.6.4 Clinical Gait Interpretation

The information and data provided for treatment decision making in clinical gait analysis include not only 
the quantitative variables described previously (i.e., 3-D kinematics such as angular displacement of the 
torso, pelvis, hip, knee, and ankle/foot, and 3-D kinetics such as moments and power of the hip, knee, and 
ankle) but also

& & & &

Clinical examination measures Biplanar video recordings of the patient walking Stride and temporal gait data 
such as step length and walking speed Electromyographic (EMG) recordings of selected lower extremity muscles

Generally, the interpretation of gait data involves the identiﬁcation of abnormalities, the determination 
of the causes of the apparent deviations, and the recommendation of treatment alternatives. As each 
additional piece of data is incorporated, a coherent picture of the patient’s walking ability is developed 
by correlating corroborating data sets and resolving apparent contradictions in the information. Experience 
allows the team to distinguish a gait anomaly that presents the difﬁculty for the patient from a gait 
compensatory mechanism that aids the patient in circumventing the gait impediment to some degree.

To illustrate aspects of this process, consider the data presented in Figures 4.28–4.30 which were measured 
from a 9-year-old girl with cerebral palsy spastic diplegia. Cerebral palsy is a nonprogressive 
neuromuscular disorder that is caused by an injury to the brain during or shortly after birth. The neural 
motor cortex is most often affected. In the ambulatory patient, this results in reduced control of the 
muscles required for balance and locomotion, causing overactivity, inappropriately timed activity, and 
muscle spasticity. Treatment options include physical therapy, bracing (orthoses), spasmolytic medications 
such as botulinum toxin and Baclofen, and orthopedic surgery and neurosurgery.

The sagittal plane kinematics for the left side of this patient (Fig. 4.28) indicate signiﬁcant involvement 
of the hip and knee. Her knee is effectively ‘‘locked’’ in an excessively ﬂexed position throughout stance 
phase (0–60% of the gait cycle) when her foot is contacting the ﬂoor. Knee motion in swing phase (60–100%) 
is also limited, with the magnitude and timing of peak knee ﬂexion in swing reduced and delayed. The range 
of motion of her hip during gait is less than normal, failing to reach full extension at the end of stance 
phase. The motion of her pelvis is signiﬁcantly greater than normal, tilting anteriorly in early stance 
coincident with extension of the hip and tilting posteriorly in swing coincident with ﬂexion of the hip.

The deviations noted in these data illustrate neuromuscular problems commonly seen in this patient 
population. Inappropriate hamstring tightness, observed during the clinical examination, and inappropriate 
muscle activity during stance, seen in Figure 4.29, prevent the knee from properly extending. This ﬂexed 
knee position also impedes normal extension of the hip in stance due to hip extensor weakness (also observed 
during the clinical examination). Hip extension is required in stance to allow the thigh to rotate under the 
advancing pelvis and upper body. To compensate for her reduced ability to extend the hip, she rotates her 
pelvis anteriorly in early stance to help move the thigh through its arc of motion. The biphasic pattern of 
the pelvic curve indicates that this is a bilateral issue to some degree.

The limited knee ﬂexion in swing combines with the plantar ﬂexed ankle position to result in foot 
clearance problems during swing phase. The inappropriate activity of the rectus femoris muscle (Fig. 4.29) 
in midswing suggests that spasticity of that muscle, a knee extensor (also observed during clinical 
examination), impedes knee ﬂexion. Moreover, the inappropriate activity of the ankle plantar ﬂexor, 
primarily the gastrocnemius muscle, in late swing suggests that it is overpowering the pretibial muscles, 
primarily the anterior tibialis muscle, resulting in plantar ﬂexion of the ankle or ‘‘foot drop.’’

The sagittal joint kinetics for this patient (Fig. 4.30) demonstrate asymmetrical involvement of the right 
and left sides. Of special note is that her right knee and hip are compensating for some of the dysfunction 
observed on the left side. Speciﬁcally, the progressively increasing right knee ﬂexion beginning at 
midstance (1st row, center) and continuing into swing aids her contralateral limb in forward advancement 
during swing (i.e., her pelvis can rock posteriorly along with a ﬂexing hip to advance

the thigh). One potentially adverse consequence of this adaptation is the elevated knee extensor moment in 
late stance that increases patella–femoral loading with indeterminate effects over time. The asymmetrical 
power production at the hip also illustrates clearly that the right lower extremity, in particular the 
muscles that cross the hip, provides the propulsion for gait with signiﬁcant power generation early in 
stance to pull the body forward and elevate its center of gravity. Moreover, the impressive hip power 
generation, both with respect to magnitude and timing, at toe-off accelerates the stance limb into swing and 
facilitates knee ﬂexion in spite of the elevated knee extensor moment magnitude. This is important to 
appreciate given the bilateral spastic response of the plantar ﬂexor muscles, as evidenced by the premature 
ankle power generation and the presentation of a spastic stretch reﬂex in the clinical examination. This 
girl uses her hip musculature, right more than left, to a much greater degree than her ankle plantar ﬂexors 
to propel herself forward during gait.

This cursory case examination illustrates the process whereby differences from normal gait are recognized 
and the associated biomechanical etiology is explored. Some of the effects on gait of neuromuscular 
pathology in the sagittal plane have been

considered in this discussion. Clinical gait analysis can also document and elucidate gait abnormalities 
associated with static bony rotational deformities. It also is useful in areas of clinical research by 
documenting treatment efﬁcacy associated with bracing, surgery, etc. It should be noted, however, that 
although engineers and applied physicists have been involved in this work for well over a hundred years, 
there remains signiﬁcant opportunity for improvement in the biomechanical protocols and analytical tools 
used in clinical gait analysis—there remains much to learn.

4.7 CARDIOVASCULAR DYNAMICS

One major organ system beneﬁting from the application of mechanics principles is cardiovascular system 
dynamics, or hemodynamics, the study of the motion of blood. From a functional point of view, the 
cardiovascular system is comprised of a complex pump, the heart, that generates pressure resulting in the 
ﬂow of a complex ﬂuid, blood, through a complex network of complex pipes, the blood vessels. 
Cardiovascular dynamics focuses on the measurement and analysis of blood pressure, volume, and

ﬂow within the cardiovascular system. The complexity of this elegant system is such that mechanical models, 
typically formulated as mathematical equations, are relied on to understand and integrate experimental data, 
to isolate and identify physiological mechanisms, and to lead ultimately to new clinical measures of heart 
performance and health and to guide clinical therapies.

As described in Chapter 3, the heart is a four-chambered pump connected to two main collections of blood 
vessels, the systemic and pulmonary circulations. This pump is electrically triggered and under neural and 
hormonal control. One-way valves control blood ﬂow. Total human blood volume is approximately 5.2 liters. 
The left ventricle, the strongest chamber, pumps 5 liters per minute at rest, almost the body’s entire blood 
volume. With each heartbeat, the left ventricle pumps 70 ml, with an average of 72 beats per minute. During 
exercise, left ventricular output may increase sixfold and heart rate more than doubles. The total length of 
the circulatory system vessels is estimated at 100,000 km, a distance two and one half times around the 
earth. The left ventricle generates approximately 1.7 watts of mechanical power at rest, increasing 
threefold during heavy exercise. One curious constant is the total number of heartbeats in a lifetime, 
around one billion in mammals (Vogel, 1992). Larger animals have slower heart rates and live longer lives, 
and vice versa for small animals.

4.7.1 Blood Rheology

Blood is comprised of ﬂuid, called plasma, and suspended cells, including erythrocytes (red blood cells), 
leukocytes (white cells), and platelets. From a mechanical point of view, a ﬂuid is distinguished from a 
solid as follows. Figure 4.31 shows a two-dimensional block of solid material (left panel) subjected to two 
opposite, parallel, transverse external forces, depicted by the solid arrows at the top and bottom surfaces. 
This applied shear force is resisted by the solid via internally generated reaction forces, depicted by the 
dashed arrows. When applied to a ﬂuid (right panel), the ﬂuid cannot resist the applied shear but rather 
ﬂows.

The applied shear forces lead to shear stresses (force per area) and the measure of ﬂow can be quantiﬁed 
by the resulting shear strain rate. In essence, the harder one pushes on a ﬂuid (higher shear stress) the 
faster the ﬂuid ﬂows (higher shear strain rate). The relationship between shear stress (t) and shear 
strain rate (_g) is the ﬂuid’s viscosity (m). Viscosity is often written as Z in biomedical applications. 
As shown in

Figure 4.32, many ﬂuids, including water, are characterized by a constant (linear) viscosity and are called 
Newtonian. Others possess nonlinear shear stress–strain rate relations, and are non-Newtonian ﬂuids. For 
example, ﬂuids that behave more viscously as shear strain rate increases (shear thickening) are called 
dilatant. One example of dilatant behavior is Dow Corning 3179 dilatant compound, a silicone polymer 
commonly known as ‘‘Silly Putty.’’ When pulled slowly, this ﬂuid stretches (plastic deformation); when 
pulled quickly it behaves as a solid and fractures. Fluids that appear less viscous with higher shear strain 
rates (shear thinning) are called pseudo-plastic. For example, no-drip latex paint ﬂows when applied with a 
brush or roller (applied shear stress) but does not ﬂow after application.

Biological ﬂuids are typically non-Newtonian. Blood plasma is Newtonian and is very similar in physical 
properties to water. Whole blood behaves as a Bingham plastic, whereby a nonzero shear stress (yield stress) 
is required before this ﬂuid begins to ﬂow. Blood is often characterized by a power law function, of the 
form

t ¼ k_gn 

(4:57)

where k and n are constants derived from a straight-line ﬁt of ln t plotted as a function _ of ln g, since

_ ln t ¼ ln k þ n ln g

Another common description of blood’s viscosity is the Casson equation:

t 2 ¼ t 2 0 þ k_g 2

(4:58)

From a Casson plot, the yield stress t 0 can be measured. Rheology, the study of deformation and ﬂow of 
ﬂuids, focuses on these often complex viscous properties of ﬂuids. Textbooks with rheological data for 
bioﬂuids include Bioﬂuid Mechanics by Mazumdar (1992) and Basic Transport Phenomena in Biomedical 
Engineering by Fournier (1999).

Example Problem 4.12

The following rheological data were measured on a blood sample:

Fit the data to a power law function using a MATLAB m-ﬁle.

Solution

% Power Law Fit of Blood Data % % Store shear strain rate and stress data in arrays alpha ¼ 
[1.5,2,3.2,6.5,11.5,16,25,50,100] ; T ¼ [12.5,16,25.2,40,62,80.5,120,240,475] ; % Take natural logs of both 
x ¼ log(alpha) ; y ¼ log(T) ; % Use MATLAB’s polyﬁt function to do linear curve ﬁt coeff ¼ polyﬁt (x,y,1) 
% Write curve ﬁt coefﬁcients as a new x-y function for plotting x1¼[0;0.01;5] y1¼polyval (coeff,x1) % Plot 
the original data as ’o’ points plot(x,y, ’o’) hold on % Overlay a plot of the curve-ﬁt line plot(x1,y1) 
grid on

title (’Power Law Function’) xlabel(’ln Strain Rate [ln (1/s)]’) ylabel(’ln Shear Stress [ln dyne/cm2]’) % 
The resulting plot appears in Figure 4.33.

&

When subjected to very low shear rates blood’s apparent viscosity is higher than expected. This is due to 
the aggregation of red blood cells, called rouleaux. Such low shear rates are lower than those typically 
occurring in major blood vessels or in medical devices. In very small tubes (<1 mm diameter), blood’s 
apparent viscosity at high shear rates is smaller than in larger tubes, known as the Fahraeus-Lindquist 
effect, arising from plasma–red cell dynamics. Beyond these two special cases, blood behaves as a Newtonian 
ﬂuid and is widely accepted as such in the scientiﬁc community. We shall see that the assumption of 
Newtonian ﬂuid greatly simpliﬁes mechanical description of the circulation.

4.7.2 Arterial Vessels

Mechanical description of blood vessels has a long and somewhat complicated history. Much of the advanced 
mathematics and applied mechanics associated with this work is beyond the scope of this textbook. This 
section will therefore give an overview of some of the main developments and will present a simpliﬁed, 
reduced arterial system model for use in the following subsection. The reader is referred to the following 
textbooks for more in-depth coverage: Circulatory System Dynamics (1978) by

Noordergraaf, Hemodynamics (1989) by Milnor, and Bioﬂuid Mechanics (1992) by Mazumdar, and for basic ﬂuid 
mechanics, Fluid Mechanics (2003) by White.

Study of the mechanical properties of the heart as a pump requires the computation of pressures and ﬂows 
arising from forces and motion of the underlying heart muscle. Consequently, general equations of motion in 
the cardiovascular system typically arise from the conservation of linear momentum. The Reynold’s transport 
theorem, a conservation equation from ﬂuid mechanics, applied to linear momentum yields the following 
general equation of motion for any ﬂuid:

dV rg À r þ r Á t ij ¼ r dt

(4:59)

where r is ﬂuid density (mass/volume), p is pressure, t ij are viscous forces, and V is velocity. r is the 
differential operator

q q q r¼i j k þ þ qx qy qz

The general velocity V is a vector function of position and time and is written

V(x, y, z, t) ¼ u(x, y, z, t)i þ u(x, y, z, t)j þ w(x, y, z, t)k where u, u, and w are the local velocities 
in the x, y, and z directions, respectively.

Equation 4.59 is comprised of four terms: gravitational, pressure, and viscous forces, plus a time-varying 
term. Note that this is a vector equation and so can be expanded in x, y, and z components as the set of 
three equations:

qp qt xx qt yx qt zx qu qu qu qu rg x À ¼ r u v w þ þ þ þ þ þ qx qx qy qz  qt qx qy qz 

(4:60)

qt xy qt yy qt zy qv qv qv qv qp rg y À ¼ r u v w þ þ þ þ þ þ qy qx qy qz  qt qx qy qz 

(4:61)

qp qt xz qt yz qt zz qw qw qw qw rg z À ¼ r u v w þ þ þ þ þ þ qz qx qy qz  qt qx qy qz 

(4:62)

This set of nonlinear, partial differential equations is general but not solvable; solution requires making 
simplifying assumptions. For example, if the ﬂuid’s viscous forces are neglected Eq. 4.59 reduces to 
Euler’s equation for inviscid ﬂow. The latter, when integrated along a streamline, yields the famous 
Bernoulli equation relating pressure and ﬂow. In application, Bernoulli’s inviscid, and consequently 
frictionless, origin is sometimes forgotten.

If ﬂow is steady, the right-hand term of Eq. 4.59 goes to zero. For incompressible ﬂuids, including 
liquids, density r is constant, which greatly simpliﬁes integration of the gravitational and time-varying 
terms that contain r. Similarly, for Newtonian ﬂuids, viscosity m is constant. In summary, although we can 
write perfectly general equations of motion, the difﬁculty of solving these equations requires making 
reasonable simplifying assumptions.

Two reasonable assumptions for blood ﬂow in major vessels are that of Newtonian and incompressible 
behavior. These assumptions reduce Eq. 4.59 to the Navier-Stokes equations:

qp q2 u 2 u 2 u q q du rg x À 2 þ 2 þ 2 ¼ r m þ qx  qx qy qz  dt

(4:63)

qp q2 v v 2 v q2  q dv rg y À 2 þ 2 þ 2 ¼ r m þ qy  qx qy qz  dt

(4:64)

qp q2 w 2 w 2 w q q dw rg z À 2 þ 2 þ 2 ¼ r m þ qz  qx qy qz  dt

(4:65)

Blood vessels are more easily described using a cylindrical coordinate system rather than a rectangular one. 
Hence the coordinates x, y, and z may be transformed to radius r, angle u, and longitudinal distance x. If 
we assume irrotational ﬂow, u ¼ 0 and two Navier-Stokes equations sufﬁce:

dP dw dw dw 2 w dw d2 w d 1 À Àm 2 þ 2 ¼ r u w þ þ þ dx  dt dr dx   dr r dr dx 

(4:66)

dP du du du 2 u du d2 u d 1 u À Àm 2 þ 2 À 2 ¼ r u w þ þ þ dr  dt dr dx   dr r dr dx r 

(4:67)

where w is longitudinal velocity dx=dt, and u is radial velocity dr=dt. Most arterial models also make use 
of the continuity equation, arising from the conservation of mass:

du

u

dw

þ þ ¼0 dr r dx

(4:68)

In essence, the net rate of mass storage in a system is equal to the net rate of mass inﬂux minus the net 
rate of mass efﬂux.

Noordergraaf and his colleagues (1969) rewrote the Navier-Stokes Equation 4.66 as

dP dQ À ¼ RQ L þ dx dt

(4:69)

where P is pressure, Q is the volume rate of ﬂow, R is an equivalent hydraulic resistance, and L is ﬂuid 
inertance. The Navier-Stokes equations describe ﬂuid mechanics within the blood vessels. Since arterial 
walls are elastic, equations of motion for the arterial wall are also required. The latter have evolved from 
linear elastic, linear viscoelastic, to complex viscoelastic (see Noordergraaf, 1978). The most general 
mechanical description of linear anisotropic arterial wall material requires 21 parameters (see Fung’s 1977 
text), most of which have never been measured. Noordergraaf et al. divided the arterial system into short 
segments and combined the ﬂuid

mechanical equation (Eq. 4.69) with the continuity equation for each vessel segment. The arterial wall 
elasticity leads to a time-varying amount of blood stored in the vessel as it bulges with each heartbeat. 
For a segment of artery, the continuity equation becomes

dQ dP À ¼ GP C þ dx dt

(4:70)

where G is leakage through the blood vessel wall. This pair of hydraulic equations (Eqs. 4.69 and 4.70) was 
used to describe each of 125 segments of the arterial system and was the ﬁrst model sufﬁciently detailed 
to explain arterial pressure and ﬂow wave reﬂection. Arterial branching leads to reﬂected pressure and 
ﬂow waves that interact in this pulsatile system. Physical R–L–C circuits were constructed and built into 
large transmission line networks with measured voltages and currents corresponding to hydraulic pressures 
and ﬂows, respectively. If distributed arterial properties such as pulse wave reﬂection are not of 
interest, the arterial system load seen by the heart can be much reduced, as an electrical network may be 
reduced to an equivalent circuit.

The most widely used arterial load is the three-element model shown in Figure 4.34. The model appears as an 
electrical circuit due to its origin prior to the advent of the digital computer. Z 0 is the characteristic 
impedance of the aorta, in essence the aorta’s ﬂow resistance. C s is transverse arterial compliance, the 
inverse of elastance, and describes stretch of the arterial system in the radial direction. R s is the 
peripheral resistance, describing the systemic arteries’ ﬂow resistance downstream of the aorta. This 
simple network may be used to represent the systemic arterial load seen by the left ventricle. The following 
ordinary differential equation relates pressure at the left-hand side, p(t), to ﬂow, Q(t):

dp 1 dQ Z C s p(t) ¼ Q(t) 1 þ þ Z 0 Cs  þ dt R s  R s 0  dt

(4:71)

Example Problem 4.13

Using basic circuit theory, derive the differential equation Eq. 4.71 from Figure 4.34.

Solution

Deﬁne node 1 as shown in Figure 4.35. By Kirchoff’s current law, the ﬂow Q going into node 1 is equal to 
the sum of the ﬂows Q 1 and Q 2 coming out of the node:

Q¼Q 1 þ Q2 

We can write Q 1 and Q 2 as

dp Q1 ¼Cs  dt1 

p1  Q2 ¼ Rs 

so

dp p1  Q¼Cs  þ dt 1 Rs 

From Ohm’s law,

pÀp 1 ¼Q Z0 

Solving the last expression for p 1 and substituting back into the ﬂow expression:

d 1 Q ¼ C s ] þ [p À Q Z 0 ] [p À Q Z0  dt Rs 

dp dQ 1 Z ¼C s C s pÀ Q À Z0  þ dt dt R s Rs 0 

Grouping terms for Q on the left and p on the right gives Eq. 4.71.

&

4.7.3 Heart Mechanics

Mechanical performance of the heart, more speciﬁcally the left ventricle, is typically characterized by 
estimates of ventricular elastance. The heart is an elastic bag that stiffens and relaxes with each 
heartbeat. Elastance is a measure of stiffness, classically deﬁned as the differential relation between 
pressure and volume:

¼ dVv 

(4:72)

Here, p v and V v denote ventricular pressure and volume, respectively. For any instant in time, ventricular 
elastance E v is the differential change in pressure with respect to volume. Mathematically, this relation 
is clear. Measurement of E v is much less clear.

In the 1970s Kennish et al. tried to estimate the differential relation of Eq. 4.72 using the ratio of 
ﬁnite changes in ventricular pressure and volume:

Dpv  Ev ¼ DVv 

(4:73)

This approach leads to physically impossible results. For example, before the aortic valve opens, the left 
ventricle is generating increasing pressure while there is not yet any change in volume. The ratio in Eq. 
4.73 gives an inﬁnite elastance when the denominator is zero. Suga and Sagawa (1974) used the ratio of 
pressure to volume itself, rather than differential or discrete changes, to estimate elastance:

p v (t) E v (t) ¼ V v (t) À Vd 

(4:74)

In this equation, V d is a dead volume that remains constant. Now all other terms are allowed to be varying 
with time. Ventricular elastance measured in this way leads to elastance curves, as depicted in Figure 4.36. 
These curves show wide variation, as suggested by the large error bars. The distinctive asymmetric shape 
leads to a major contradiction. A simple experiment involves clamping the aorta, thereby preventing the left 
ventricle from ejecting blood, denoted an isovolumic beat. Equation 4.74 shows that under isovolumic 
conditions (V v is constant) ventricular pressure p v must have the same shape as elastance E v (t). 
However, experiments show that isovolumic

pressure curves are symmetric, unlike Figure 4.36. A further complication is the requirement of ejecting 
beats for measuring E v (t), which requires not only the heart (a ventricle) but also a circulation (blood 
vessels). Hence, time-varying elastance curves, such as those in Figure 4.36, are measures of both a 
particular heart (the source) combined with a particular circulation (its load). Experiments show that 
elastance curves measured in this way are subject to vascular changes, as well as the desired ventricular 
properties. As such, this approach cannot uniquely separate out ventricular from vascular properties. 
Consequently, a new measure of the heart’s mechanical properties is required.

The problems just described (i.e., inconsistent isovolumic and ejecting behavior and the combined 
heart–blood vessel properties) led to the development of a new mechanical description of the left ventricle 
(Mulier, 1994; Palladino et al., 1997). This model should be simple and versatile, and should have direct 
physiological signiﬁcance, in contrast with simulations which merely mimic physiological behavior. The 
model was developed using isolated canine heart experiments, as depicted in Figure 4.37. The left ventricle 
was ﬁlled with an initial volume of blood, subjected to

different loading conditions, stimulated, and allowed to beat. Ventricular pressure, and in some experiments 
ventricular outﬂow, was then measured and recorded.

Experiments began with measurement of isovolumic ventricular pressure. For each experiment the isolated left 
ventricle was ﬁlled with an initial volume (end-diastolic) and the aorta was clamped to prevent outﬂow of 
blood. The ventricle was stimulated and generated ventricular pressure was measured and recorded. The 
ventricle was then ﬁlled to a new end-diastolic volume and the experiment repeated. As in the famous 
experiments of Otto Frank (c. 1895), isovolumic pressure is directly related to ﬁlling. Figure 4.38 shows a 
set of isovolumic pressure curves measured on a normal canine left ventricle.

These isovolumic pressure curves were then described by the following equation. Ventricular pressure p v is 
a function of time t and ventricular volume V v according to

" # ð t c t Þ a )e À ð t r tÀt b Þa  (1 À eÀ  p v ¼ a(V v À b) 2 þ (cV v À d) (1 À e À ð t c t p Þ a )e À ð 
t r t p Àt b Þa 

(4:75)

or written more compactly,

p v (t, V v ) ¼ a(V v À b) 2 þ (cV v À d)f(t)

(4:76)

where f(t) is the activation function in square brackets in Eq. 4.75. The constants a, b, c, d, t p , t c , 
t r , and a were derived from the isolated canine ventricle experiments. Physiologically, Eq. 4.76 says that 
the ventricle is a time- and volume-dependent

pressure generator. The term to the left of the plus sign (including constants a and b) describes the 
ventricle’s passive elastic properties. The term to the right (including c and d) describes its active 
elastic properties, arising from the active generation of force in the underlying heart muscle. 
Representative model quantities measured from canine experiments are given in Table 4.3. This model was 
adapted to describe the human left ventricle using quantities in the right-hand column (Palladino et al., 
1997).

Example Problem 4.14

Solve Eq. 4.75 and plot ventricular pressure p v (t) for one human heartbeat. Use initial ventricular volume 
of 150 ml and the parameter values in Table 4.3.

Solution

The following MATLAB m-ﬁle will perform the required computation and plot the results, shown in Figure 
4.39.

% ventricle.m % % MATLAB m-ﬁle to compute isovolumic pressure using Mulier ventricle model % % Initial 
conditions:

% delt ¼ 0.001; % The interation time step delta t a ¼ 7e-4; b ¼ 20.; c ¼ 2.5; d ¼ 80.; tc ¼ 0.264; tp ¼ 
0.371;

tr ¼ 0.299; tb ¼ 0.258; alpha ¼ 2.88; Vv0 ¼ 150; % Initial (end-diastolic) ventricular volume % % Compute an 
intermediate term denom % to simplify computations:

%

denom ¼ ((1: À exp ( À (tp=tc)^alpha) ) Ã exp ( À ( (tp À tb)=tr)^alpha) ); % % Compute for initial time t ¼ 
0 (MATLAB does not allow 0 index) %

t (1) ¼ 0.;

Vv (1) ¼ Vv0;

edp ¼ a Ã ( (Vv0 À b) )^2;

pdp ¼ c Ã Vv0 À d;

pp ¼ pdp/denom;

t1 ¼ 0.; % Time step for ﬁrst exponential

t2 ¼ 0.; % Time step for second exponential

e1 ¼ exp ( À (t1=tc)^alpha);

e2 ¼ exp ( À (t2=tr)^alpha);

pv0 ¼ edp þ pp Ã ( (1: À e1) Ã e2);

% % Main computation loop:

% for j¼2:1000 t(j) ¼ t(j À 1) þ delt; Vv(j) ¼ Vv(j À 1); % edp ¼ a Ã ( (Vv(j) À b) )^2; pdp ¼ c Ã Vv(j) À 
d; pp ¼ pdp/denom; t1 ¼ t(j); % Second exponential begins at t > tb t2 ¼ t(j) À tb; if (t2 < 0.); t2 ¼ 0.; 
end e1 ¼ exp ( À (t1=tc)^alpha); e2 ¼ exp ( À (t2=tr)^alpha); pv(j) ¼ edp þ pp Ã ( (1: À e1) Ã e2); end

% plot (t,pv) grid on title (‘Isovolumic Ventricular Pressure’) xlabel (‘Time [s]’) ylabel (‘Ventricular 
Pressure Pv [mmHg]’)

&

4.7.4 Cardiovascular Modeling

This concise model of the left ventricle was coupled to the reduced arterial load model of Figure 4.34 and 
allowed to eject blood. Model parameter values for a normal arterial load are given in Table 4.4. Figure 
4.40 shows results for a normal canine left

ventricle ejecting into a normal arterial system. The solid curves (left ordinate) describe ventricular 
pressure p u and root aortic pressure as functions of time. Clinically, arterial pressure is reported as two 
numbers (e.g., 110/60). This corresponds to the maximum and minimum root arterial pulse pressures, in this 
case about 120/65 mmHg. The dashed curve (right ordinate) shows ventricular outﬂow. The ventricle was 
ﬁlled with an end-diastolic volume of 45 ml and it ejected 30 ml (stroke volume), giving an ejection 
fraction of 66%, which is about normal for this size animal.

The same ventricle may be coupled to a pathological arterial system, for example, one with doubled 
peripheral resistance R s . This change is equivalent to narrowed blood vessels. As expected, increased 
peripheral resistance raises arterial blood pressure (to 140/95 mmHg) and impedes the ventricle’s ability to 
eject blood (Fig. 4.41). The ejection fraction decreases to 50% in this experiment. Other experiments, such 
as altered arterial stiffness, may be performed. The model’s ﬂexibility allows description of heart 
pathology as well as changes in blood vessels. This one ventricular equation with one set of measured 
parameters is able to describe the wide range of hemodynamics observed experimentally (Palladino et al., 
1997).

The previous expressions for ventricular elastance deﬁned in Eqs. 4.73 and 4.74 have the same units as 
elastance deﬁned classically as Eq. 4.72, but are mathematically not the same. Since ventricular pressure 
is now deﬁned as an analytical function (Eq. 4.75), ventricular elastance, E u , deﬁned in the classical 
sense as qp u =qV u , may be calculated as

E u (t, V u ) ¼ 2a(V u À b) þ c (1 À e À ð t c t p Þ a )e À ð t r t p Àt b Þa 

(4:77)

or

E u (t, V u ) ¼ 2a(V u À b) þ cf(t)

(4:78)

Figure 4.42 shows ventricular elastance curves computed using the new model’s analytical deﬁnition of 
elastance (Eq. 4.77). Elastance was computed for a wide range of ventricular and arterial states, including 
normal and pathological ventricles, normal and pathological arterial systems, and isovolumic and ejecting 
beats. These elastance curves are relatively invariant and cluster in two groups—either normal or weakened 
ventricle contractile state. Consequently, this new measure of elastance may now effectively assess the 
health of the heart alone, separate from blood vessel pathology.

Experiments showed that when the left ventricle ejects blood, ventricular pressure is somewhat different 
than expected. As depicted in Figure 4.43, early during ejection the ventricle generates less pressure than 
expected, denoted pressure deactivation. Later in systole the heart generates greater pressure, denoted 
hyperactivation. These two variations with ﬂow have been termed the ejection effect (Danielsen et al., 
2000). The ejection effect was incorporated into the ventricle model of Eq. 4.76 by adding a ﬂow-dependent 
term:

p u (t, V u , Q u ) ¼ a(V u À b) 2 þ (cV u À d)F(t, Q u )

(4:79)

with F replacing the time function f in Eq. 4.76:

F(t, Q u ) ¼ f(t) À k 1 Q u (t) þ k 2 Q u 2 (t À t), t ¼ kt

(4:80)

and k 1 , k 2 , and k are additional model constants. In summary, the ventricle is a timevolume- and 
ﬂow-dependent pressure generator. Figure 4.44 shows computed pressures and ﬂows for this formulation at 
left, compared to the results minus the ejection effect at right for comparison. The ejection effect tends 
to change the shape of both pressure and ﬂow curves to more closely resemble experimental curves.

Addition of the ejection effect modiﬁes the computed ventricular elastance curves, as depicted in Figure 
4.45. All curves are computed using the new function of Eq. 4.77. The dashed curve, minus the ejection 
effect, is symmetric, as in Figure 4.42. Addition of the ejection effect (solid) makes ventricular elastance 
asymmetrically skewed to the right, much like the measured curves of Suga and Sagawa depicted in Figure 
4.36. As expected, the mechanical process of ejecting blood has a direct effect on the heart’s elastance.

In summary, the left ventricle may be described as a time-, volume-, and ﬂowdependent pressure generator. A 
small number of experimentally derived parameters is sufﬁcient to describe the wide range of observed 
cardiovascular dynamics. This

approach links experiment and theory, leading to new ideas and experiments. Work is currently underway to 
devise a new measure of cardiovascular health using this model. In essence, it is thought that the magnitude 
of the observed ejection effect for a particular heart should be directly related to its health.

The left ventricle model of Eq. 4.75 was used to describe each of the four chambers of the human heart, 
depicted in Figure 4.46 (Palladino et al., 2000). This complete model of the circulatory system displays a 
remarkable range of cardiovascular physiology with a small set of equations and parameters. For example, 
plotting ventricular pressure as a function of ventricular volume shows the mechanical work performed by the 
ventricle, denoted pressure–volume work loops. The area within each loop corresponds to external work 
performed by the heart. Figure 4.47 shows left and right ventricle work loops for the normal heart ejecting 
into the normal (control) circulatory system, depicted by solid curves. The right ventricle work loop is 
smaller, as expected, than the left. Figure 4.47 also shows the same two work loops for a weakened left 
ventricle (dashed curves). As expected, the left ventricle work loop is diminished in size. This work loop 
also shifts to the right on the volume axis. Since the weaker ventricle ejects less blood, more remains to 
ﬁll the heart more for the subsequent beat (EDV of 194 instead of 122 ml). This increased ﬁlling partially

compensates for the weakened ventricle via Starling’s law (increased pressure for increased ﬁlling).

Changing only one model constant, c, in Eq. 4.75 is sufﬁcient to vary chamber contractile state. For 
example, Table 4.5 shows examples of congestive heart failure, resulting from decreases in c for the left 
ventricle and for the right ventricle.

Decreasing left ventricular contractile state to one third of the control value (c ¼ 1:0) lowers left 
ventricular ejection fraction from 53% to 25%, and root aortic pulse pressure decreases from 133/70 to 93/52 
mmHg. Left ventricular stroke volume decreases less, from 64 to 48 ml, since it is compensated for by the 
increased left end-diastolic volume (194 ml) via Starling’s law. Decreasing left ventricular contractile 
state is equivalent to left congestive heart failure. Consequently, pulmonary venous volume increases from 
1347 ml to 1981 ml (not shown), indicating pulmonary congestion for this case.

Similar changes are noted when the right ventricle’s contractile state is halved (c ¼ 0:5). The right 
ventricular ejection fraction drops from 46% to 24%, root pulmonary artery pulse pressure decreases from 
49/15 to 29/12 mmHg, and right stroke volume decreases from 64 to 44 ml, with an increased end-diastolic 
volume of 164 ml, from 141 ml. Conversely, c can be increased in any heart chamber to depict administration 
of an inotropic drug. Although not plotted, pressures, ﬂows, and volumes are available at any circuit site, 
all as functions of time.

Changes in blood vessel properties may be studied alone or in combination with altered heart properties. 
Other system parameters such as atrial performance, as well as other experiments, may be examined. The 
modular form of this model allows its expansion for more detailed studies of particular sites in the 
circulatory system.

The ﬁeld of biomechanics applies physical principles to living systems using the language of mathematics. 
Hemodynamics studies the human cardiovascular system, which is comprised of an interesting pump moving 
interesting ﬂuid around a complicated network of interesting pipes. In developing hemodynamic principles, 
experiments and analysis go hand-in-hand, ensuring the validity of principles with experiments and with 
analysis clarifying, modifying, and often preceding experiments. In this fashion, interpretations of 
cardiovascular health are further deﬁned.

EXERCISES

1. Write all the vector expressions of Eqs. 4.1 through 4.14 using MATLAB.

2. Repeat Example Problem 4.2 using a z–x–y rotation sequence.

3. Write the free-body diagrams for each of the three orientations of the humerus in Figure 3.36. For a 
particular load and ﬁxed position, write and solve the equations of static equilibrium.

4. Solve Example Problem 4.5 for forearm orientations angled u from the horizontal position. Let u vary from 
0À708 (down) from the horizontal in 158 increments. Using MATLAB, plot the required biceps muscle force FB  
for static equilibrium as a function of u. By how much does this force vary over this range?

5. Repeat Problem 4, this time plotting forces F A , F B , and F C over the same range of angles u.

6. Considering the previous problem, explain why Nautilus weight machines at the gym use asymmetric pulleys.

7. The force plate in Figure 4.9 is 70 cm by 70 cm square. At a particular instant of the gait cycle each 
transducer reads F 1 ¼ 210 N, F 2 ¼ 220 N, F 3 ¼ 150 N, and F 4 ¼ 180 N. Compute the resultant force and its 
location.

8. For your own body, compute the mass moment of inertia of each body segment in Table 4.1 with respect to 
its center of mass.

9. Repeat Example Problem 4.8 using a titanium rod with circular cross-sectional diameter of 9 mm.

10. Write the Simulink models of the three-element Kelvin viscoelastic description and perform the creep and 
stress relaxation tests, the results of which appear in Figures 4.23 and 4.24.

11. Use the three-element Kelvin model to describe the stress relaxation of a biomaterial of your choice. 
Using a stress response curve from the literature, compute the model spring constants K 1 and K 2 and the 
viscous damping coefﬁcient b.

12. Write and solve the kinematic equations deﬁning an anatomically referenced coordinate system for the 
pelvis, {e pa }, using MATLAB.

13. Using the kinematic data of Section 4.6.2, compute the instantaneous ankle power of the 25.2 kg patient 
using MATLAB.

14. Given the pelvis and thigh anatomical coordinate systems deﬁned in Example Problems 4.9 and 4.10, 
compute the pelvis tilt, obliquity, and rotation angles using an x–y–z rotation sequence.

15. Repeat Problem 14 (using an x–y–z rotation sequence) solving for hip ﬂexion/extension, hip 
abduction/adduction, and internal/external hip rotation. Hint: {e ta } is the triple-primed coordinate 
system and {e pa } is the unprimed system in this case.

16. Using MATLAB, determine the effect that a 12-mm perturbation in each coordinate direction would have on 
ankle moment amplitude (Section

4.6.3).

17. Fit the blood rheological data of Example Problem 4.12 to a Casson model and ﬁnd the yield stress t 0 
for blood.

18. Solve Eq. 4.71 for pressure p(t) when the aortic valve is closed. Using the parameter values in Table 
4.4, plot p as a function of time for one heart beat (t ¼ 0 À 1 sec).

19. Compute isovolumic ventricular pressure p v (t) for the canine heart with initial volumes V v ¼ 30, 40, 
50, 60, 70 ml. Overlay these plots as in Figure

4.38.

20. Write a MATLAB m-ﬁle to compute ventricular elastance using Eq. 4.77.

Compute and plot E v (t) for the parameter values in Example Problem 4.14.

SUGGESTED READING

Allard, P., Stokes, I.A.F. and Blanchi, J.P. (Eds.), (1995). Three-Dimensional Analysis of Human Movement. 
Human Kinetics, Champagne, II.

Burstein, A.H. and Wright, T.M. (1994). Fundamentals of Orthopaedic Biomechanics. Williams

& Wilkins, Baltimore.

Danielsen, M., Palladino, J.L. and Noordergraaf, A. (2000). The left ventricular ejection effect.

In Mathematical Modelling in Medicine (J.T. Ottesen and M. Danielsen, Eds.). IOS Press,

Amsterdam.

Davis, R.B.D. III. (1986). Musculoskeletal biomechanics: Fundamental measurements and

analysis. Chapter 6 in Biomedical Engineering and Instrumentation (J.D. Bronzino, Ed.)

PWS Engineering, Boston.

Davis R.B, O˜unpuu S, Tyburski D.J., Gage J.R. (1991). A gait analysis data collection and

reduction technique. Human Movement Sci. 10, 575–587.

Davis R, DeLuca P. (1996). Clinical gait analysis: Current methods and future directions. In

Human Motion Analysis: Current Applications and Future Directions (G. Harris, and

P. Smith, Eds.), IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ.

Dugas, R. (1988). A History of Mechanics, Dover, New York. Reprinted from a 1955 text. Fournier, R.L. 
(1999). Basic Transport Phenomena in Biomedical Engineering. Taylor & Francis,

Philadelphia.

Fung, Y.C. (1977). A First Course in Continuum Mechanics, 2nd Ed. Prentice-Hall, Englewood

Cliffs, NJ.

Fung, Y.C. (1993). Biomechanics: Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues, 2nd Ed. Springer-

Verlag, New York.

Gage, J.R. (1991). Gait Analysis in Cerebral Palsy. MacKeith, London.

Ganong, W.F. (1997). Review of Medical Physiology, 18th Ed. Appleton & Lange, Stamford,

CT.

Greenwood, D.T. (1965). Principles of Dynamics. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Huxley, A.F. (1957). 
Muscle structure and theories of contraction. Prog. Biophys. 7: 255–318. Kennish, A., Yellin, E. and Frater, 
R. W. (1995). Dynamic stiffness proﬁles in the left ventricle. J.

Appl. Physiol. 39, 565.

Mazumdar, J.N. (1992). Bioﬂuid Mechanics. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.

Meriam, J.L. and Kraige, L.G. (2002). Engineering Mechanics, 5th Ed., Wiley, New York. Milnor, W.R. (1989). 
Hemodynamics, 2nd Ed. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore.

Milnor, W.R. (1990). Cardiovascular Physiology. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Mow, V.C. and Hayes, W.C. (1999). Basic Orthopaedic Biomechanics, 2nd Ed. Lippincott-

Raven, Philadelphia.

McCulloch, A.D. (2003). Cardiac biomechanics. In Biomechanics Principles and Application.

(Schneck, D.J. and Bronzino, J.D., Eds.). CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Mulier, J.P. (1994). Ventricular Pressure as a Function of Volume and Flow. Ph.D. dissertation,

Univ. of Leuven, Belgium.

Needham, D.M. (1971). Machina Carnis: The Biochemistry of Muscular Contraction in its

Historical Development. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Nichols, W.W. and O’Rourke, M.F. (1990). McDonald’s Blood Flow in Arteries: Theoretical,

Experimental and Clinical Principles, 3rd Ed. Edward Arnold, London.

Nigg, B.M. (1994). In Biomechanics of the Musculo-Skeletal System (Nig, B.M. and Herzog, W.,

Eds.). Wiley, New York.

Noordergraaf, A. (1969). Hemodynamics. In Biological Engineering. (Schwan, H.P., Ed.).

McGraw-Hill, New York.

Noordergraaf, A. (1978). Circulatory System Dynamics. Academic, New York.

Palladino, J.L. and Noordergraaf, A. (1998). Muscle contraction mechanics from ultrastruc-

tural dynamics. In Analysis and Assessment of Cardiovascular Function (Drzewiecki, G.M.

and Li, J.K.-J., Eds.). Springer-Verlag, New York.

Palladino, J.L., Mulier, J.P. and Noordergraaf, A. (1999). Closed-loop circulation model based

on the Frank mechanism, Surv. Math. Ind. 7, 177–186.

Palladino, J.L., Ribeiro, L.C. and Noordergraaf, A. (2000). Human circulatory system model

based on Frank’s mechanism. In Mathematical Modelling in Medicine (Ottesen, J.T. and

Danielsen, M., Eds.). IOS Press, Amsterdam.

Roark, R.J. (1969). Formulas for Stress and Strain, 6th Ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Singer, C. and Underwood, E.A. (1962). A Short History of Medicine, 2nd ed. Oxford Univ.

Press, New York.

Suga, H. and Sagawa, K. (1994). Instantaneous pressure–volume relationship under various

end-diastolic volume, Circ. Res. 35, 117–126.

Weber, E. (1846). Handwo terbuch der physiologie. Vol. 3B. R. Wagner, ed., Vieweg, Braun-

schweig.

Westerhof, N. and Noordergraaf, A. (1990). Arterial viscoelasticity: A generalized model,

J. Biomech. 3, 357–379.

White, F.M. (2003). Fluid Mechanics, 5th Ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Winter, D.A. (1990). Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Movement. Wiley, New York. Vogel, S. (1992). 
Vital Circuits: On Pumps, Pipes, and the Workings of Circulatory System.

Oxford Univ. Press, New York.


