Preface
In the data analysis for my own research work, I was often slowed down by two
things: (1) I did not know enough statistics, and (2) the books available would
provide a theoretical background, but no real practical help. The book you are
holding in your hands (or on your tablet or laptop) is intended to be the book that
will solve this very problem. It is designed to provide enough basic understanding
so that you know what you are doing, and it should equip you with the tools you
need. I believe that the Python solutions provided in this book for the most basic
statistical problems address at least 90 % of the problems that most physicists,
biologists, and medical doctors encounter in their work. So if you are the typical
graduate student working on a degree, or a medical researcher analyzing the latest
experiments, chances are that you will find the tools you require here—explanation
and source-code included.
This is the reason I have focused on statistical basics and hypothesis tests in this
book and refer only briefly to other statistical approaches. I am well aware that most
of the tests presented in this book can also be carried out using statistical modeling.
But in many cases, this is not the methodology used in many life science journals.
Advanced statistical analysis goes beyond the scope of this book and—to be frank—
exceeds my own knowledge of statistics.
My motivation for providing the solutions in Python is based on two considera-
tions. One is that I would like them to be available to everyone. While commercial
solutions like Matlab, SPSS, Minitab, etc., offer powerful tools, most can only use
them legally in an academic setting. In contrast, Python is completely free (“as in
free beer” is often heard in the Python community). The second reason is that Python
is the most beautiful coding language that I have yet encountered; and around 2010
Python and its documentation matured to the point where one can use it without
being a serious coder. Together, this book, Python, and the tools that the Python
ecosystem offers today provide a beautiful, free package that covers all the statistics
that most researchers will need in their lifetime

viii Preface
For Whom This Book Is
This book assumes that:
• You have some basic programming experience: If you have done no program-
ming previously, you may want to start out with Python, using some of the great
links provided in the text. Starting programming and starting statistics may be a
bit much all at once.
• You are not a statistics expert: If you have advanced statistics experience, the
online help in Python and the Python packages may be sufficient to allow you
to do most of your data analysis right away. This book may still help you to
get started with Python. However, the book concentrates on the basic ideas
of statistics and on hypothesis tests, and only the last part introduces linear
regression modeling and Bayesian statistics.
This book is designed to give you all (or at least most of) the tools that you
will need for statistical data analysis. I attempt to provide the background you need
to understand what you are doing. I do not prove any theorems and do not apply
mathematics unless necessary. For all tests, a working Python program is provided.
In principle, you just have to define your problem, select the corresponding program,
and adapt it to your needs. This should allow you to get going quickly, even if you
have little Python experience. This is also the reason why I have not provided the
software as one single Python package. I expect that you will have to tailor each
program to your specific setup (data format, plot labels, return values, etc.).
This book is organized into three parts:
Part I gives an introduction to Python: how to set it up, simple programs to get
started, and tips how to avoid some common mistakes. It also shows how to read
data from different sources into Python and how to visualize statistical data.
Part II provides an introduction to statistical analysis. How to design a study,
and how best to analyze data, probability distributions, and an overview of the
most important hypothesis tests. Even though modern statistics is firmly based
in statistical modeling, hypothesis tests still seem to dominate the life sciences.
For each test a Python program is provided that shows how the test can be
implemented.
Part III provides an introduction to statistical modeling and a look at advanced
statistical analysis procedures. I have also included tests on discrete data in this
section, such as logistic regression, as they utilize “generalized linear models”
which I regard as advanced. The book ends with a presentation of the basic ideas
of Bayesian statistics.
Additional Material
This book comes with many additional Python programs and sample data, which
are available online. These programs include listings of the programs printed in the
book, solutions to the examples given at the end of most chapters, and code samples

Preface ix
with a working example for each test presented in this book. They also include the
code used to generate the pictures in this book, as well as the data used to run the
programs.
The Python code samples accompanying the book are available at http://www.
quantlet.de. All Python programs and data sets can be found on GitHub: https://
github.com/thomas-haslwanter/statsintro_python.git. Links to all material are avail-
able at http://www.springer.com/de/book/9783319283159

Part I
Python and Statistics
The first part of the book presents an introduction to statistics based on Python. It is
impossible to cover the whole language in 30 or 40 pages, so if you are a beginner,
please see one of the excellent Python introductions available in the internet for
details. Links are given below. This part is a kick-start for Python; it shows how
to install Python under Windows, Linux, or MacOS, and goes step-by-step through
documented programming examples. Tips are included to help avoid some of the
problems frequently encountered while learning Python.
Because most of the data for statistical analysis are commonly obtained from text
files, Excel files, or data preprocessed by Matlab, the second chapter presents simple
ways to import these types of data into Python.
The last chapter of this part illustrates various ways of visualizing data in Python.
Since the flexibility of Python for interactive data analysis has led to a certain
complexity that can frustrate new Python programmers, the code samples presented
in Chap. 3 for various types of interactive plots should help future Pythonistas avoid
these problems.

Chapter 1
Why Statistics?
Statistics is the explanation of variance in the light of what remains unexplained.
Every day we are confronted with situations with uncertain outcomes, and must
make decisions based on incomplete data: “Should I run for the bus? Which stock
should I buy? Which man should I marry? Should I take this medication? Should
I have my children vaccinated?” Some of these questions are beyond the realm
of statistics (“Which person should I marry?”), because they involve too many
unknown variables. But in many situations, statistics can help extract maximum
knowledge from information given, and clearly spell out what we know and what we
don’t know. For example, it can turn a vague statement like “This medication may
cause nausea,” or “You could die if you don’t take this medication” into a specific
statement like “Three patients in one thousand experience nausea when taking this
medication,” or “If you don’t take this medication, there is a 95 % chance that you
will die.”
Without statistics, the interpretation of data can quickly become massively
flawed. Take, for example, the estimated number of German tanks produced during
World War II, also known as the “German Tank Problem.” The estimate of the
number of German tanks produced per month from standard intelligence data was
1,550; however, the statistical estimate based on the number of tanks observed
was 327, which was very close to the actual production number of 342 (http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/German_tank_problem).
Similarly, using the wrong tests can also lead to erroneous results.
In general, statistics will help to
• Clarify the question.
• Identify the variable and the measure of that variable that will answer that
question.
• Determine the required sample size.

• Describe variation.
• Make quantitative statements about estimated parameters.
• Make predictions based on your data.
Reading the Book Statistics was originally invented—like so many other things—
by the famous mathematician C.F. Gauss, who said about his own work, “Ich habe
fleissig sein müssen; wer es gleichfalls ist, wird eben so weit kommen.” (“I had to
work hard; if you work hard as well, you, too, will be successful.”). Just as reading a
book about playing the piano won’t turn you into a great pianist, simply reading this
book will not teach you statistical data analysis. If you don’t have your own data
to analyze, you need to do the exercises included. Should you become frustrated or
stuck, you can always check the sample Solutions provided at the end of the book.
Exercises Solutions to the exercises provided can be found at the end of the book.
In my experience, very few people work through large numbers of examples on their
own, so I have not included additional exercises in this book.
If the information here is not sufficient, additional material can be found in other
statistical textbooks and on the web:
Books There are a number of good books on statistics. My favorite is Altman
(1999): it does not dwell on computers and modeling, but gives an extremely useful
introduction to the field, especially for life sciences and medical applications. Many
formulations and examples in this manuscript have been taken from that book.
A more modern book, which is more voluminous and, in my opinion, a bit harder to
read, is Riffenburgh (2012). Kaplan (2009) provides a simple introduction to modern
regression modeling. If you know your basic statistics, a very good introduction
to Generalized Linear Models can be found in Dobson and Barnett (2008), which
provides a sound, advanced treatment of statistical modeling.
WWW In the web, you will find very extensive information on statistics in
English at
• http://www.statsref.com/
• http://www.vassarstats.net/
• http://www.biostathandbook.com/
• http://onlinestatbook.com/2/index.html
• http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/index.htm
A good German web page on statistics and regulatory issues is http://www.
reiter1.com/.
I hope to convince you that Python provides clear and flexible tools for most of
the statistical problems that you will encounter, and that you will enjoy using it.


